This is an interesting and informative paper, although I don't think that the current title is very good. Introns early and introns late are irreconciliable views, they can't both be right so it is not really a draw. And if they are both wrong it is not a draw either. The paper is basically an essay on "some aspects of eukaryotic introns and their possible evolutionary significance" and a title along those lines might better advertise its content. That title would paraphrase one of Ford Doolittle's more famous titles (54th Symp. Soc. Gen. Microbiol. Pp. 1–21, 1996), which was intentionally identical to Stanier's famous 1970 SGM title (Symp. Soc. Gen. Microbiol. 20, 1–38). Too bad that there is not a 2006 SGM symposium volume, this would have fit nicely.

As its main thrust (from my viewpoint), the text extends and further develops the idea in ref. 59 that introns may have precipitated the origin of the eukaryotic nucleus (as a consequence of the origin of mitochondria) and NMD by the compatible notion that introns might have precipitated ubiquitinylation as well. This suggests that several otherwise puzzling eukaryotic novelties can be better understood (under these premises) as defense responses in the broad sense against invading mobile elements (group II introns, from the mitochondrion in the simplest interpretation). Ideas that aid our understanding need not require that the ideas are correct (how can we prove anything about early evolution anyway?). But if they help us to structure the problem (and the prokaryote-to-eukaryote transition needs considerable restructuring with the demise of archezoa) by linking phenomena that appear otherwise unrelated in a temporal and mechanistic manner that is tangible, then that constitutes progress. This paper fills that bill.

At the same time, the paper looks further back in evolution towards the origin of genes and aims to reconcile aspects of introns-early with aspects of introns-late. The important evidence for intron stasis in animals indicates that one aspect of introns late in some of its original formulation is wrong: introns are apparently not continuously mobile over time. There was a time when they were actively mobile, but that time has apparently past. I still find it interesting that, as far as I know, nobody has ever observed the same intron in two places in genomes, that is, recent spliceosomal intron transposition does not seem to occur at an observable rate. Introns late was saying that it should be ongoing today. One point for introns late, but probably for the wrong reason. One could probably calculate the maximum rate at which introns with significant sequence similarity move, that would be interesting.

If one accepts the view of an RNA world, then recombination is splicing, so the idea that splicing was around very early fits well. The idea that spliceosomal introns are in situ holdovers from that phase of gene invention (the exon theory of genes) is part of the eukaryotes early (or thermoreduction) idea still today, but beyond the New Zealand and French sections, I don't know that very many folks are card-carrying members in that club anymore. Ref. 98 distinguishes introns first from the exon theory, that could be debated because except for snoRNAs they are saying the same thing. Ref 98 has "intron gain" in the title, suggesting that there is some evidence for recent intron gain, I wonder what that evidence is, in detail.

The history aspects of the introns early vs late debate are more easily dealt with accurately by someone who was in the thick of it. I'm not convinced that the whole introns debate is needed to understand the novel aspects of this paper, getting to the point more quickly might keep readers on track more effectively. Introns early vs introns late is over and I would not recommend warming back up. The present title as a subtitle of a more informative title might get the early introns players back into the arena again, though, which would be interesting. But this paper is suggesting that they would need to be debating other ideas, which is unlikely to occur.

Background, 2nd paragraph: the exon theory of genes came much later

Results and Discussion, section "Multiple, pivotal roles of ancient introns in eukaryogenesis...". 4th paragraph: exon theory of genes, but one that operates in eukaryotes only.

The replies to all comments, in particular the comments of referees 1, 2, and 4, add quite a lot to this interesting paper that was missing in the first version. This document now contains the best and most accurate summary of whence introns early that there is, but as a published referee report, that's something new for the literature. I wonder how to cite it.

What is the consensus of what has been said here? I think it goes like this: Because RNA recombination was probably involved in the origin of genes, and because splicing is RNA recombination, introns were probably involved in the primordial assembly of genes. But (NB: none of) the introns of eukaryotes were present at any of their current positions as those first genes arose, because spliceosomal introns are a secondary invention of the eukaryotic lineage via degeneration of group II introns that were acquired via the mitochondrion. This is not what either introns early or introns late was saying, as far as I can recall. But that debate structured the problem in a way that gave us concepts to sort the current observations from genomes into a reasonable temporal sequence of imaginable events. So I still think that the compromise offered by the title is not delivered. The present view is not introns early or the exon theory of genes, it is more the intron theory of nuclear origins. Any way one cuts the cake, introns still seem to carry burgeoning evolutionary significance; that comes closer to what introns early was saying than to what introns late was saying.

The view expressed here that the host for the origin of mitochondria was a garden variety archaebacterium (lacking introns, lacking a nucleus, lacking cytoskeleton, lacking phagocytosis) is a significant part of the present synthesis. This is what some of us have been saying for quite a while, the idea can be found in Ford Doolittle's 1996 SGM paper and in papers by Jim Lake (Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95:6239–6244, 1998; Nature 431:152–155, 2004), Dennis Searcy (In The Origin and Evolution of the Cell. Hartman, H. and Matsuno, K. eds. World Scientific, Singapore. pp 47–78), and others (Nature 392:37–41, 1998; BioEssays 21:99–104, 1996). The significance of this concept is substantial because it implies that there was no lineage of eukaryotic-type gene or cell organization that goes all the way back to the origin of life (an assumption implicit in most formulations of introns early). The view of an archaebacterial host suggests that eukaryotes arose directly from fully-fledged and free-living prokaryotes, not directly from the same collection of organic molecules that gave rise to prokaryotes. It is thus mutually exclusive with regard to the progenote concept, which is closely related to introns early, but is compatible with some (but by no means all) symbiogenic views of eukaryogenesis. An historian of science specialized in the area of endosymbiosis, Jan Sapp, has gotten this aspect of the modern history of endosymbiosis and early cell evolution wrong on several occasions, so it was nice to see it spelled out more clearly by the authors and referees of this contribution. In 1981, Woese published an interesting paper in the June issue of Scientific American (p 98ff) that put his progenote view of eukaryote origins against Margulis's view of eukaryote origins head-to-head in figures. The progenote view was the view held by introns early, I suppose, or introns early might have even been an edifice of the progenote concept, who knows. Twenty five years later, neither the Woese camp nor the Margulis camp has indicated any willingness to find the kind compromise that Koonin has suggested here, as inspection of their more recent papers will attest. Maybe refugees from those two camps can someday find a popular solution – not a compromise! – that squares off well with the observations from genomes.