Exploring phenotype space through neutral evolution
Abstract
RNA secondary-structure folding algorithms predict the existence of connected networks of RNA sequences with identical secondary structures. Fitness landscapes that are based on the mapping between RNA sequence and RNA secondary structure hence have many neutral paths. A neutral walk on these fitness landscapes gives access to a virtually unlimited number of secondary structures that are a single point mutation from the neutral path. This shows that neutral evolution explores phenotype space and can play a role in adaptation.

Key words
RNA secondary structure Neutral Evolution Adaptive evolution Genotype-phenotype relation Sequence space Fitness landscape

Introduction
Ever since Sewall Wright introduced the metaphor of an
‘‘adaptive landscape’’ (Wright 1932) the view on adaptive evolution has been dominated by the image of an
uphill walk of a population on a mountainous fitness
landscape in which it can get stuck on suboptimal peaks.
The neutralist perspective that evolution at the molecular
level is dominated by nonadaptive, neutral changes
(Kimura 1983) has hardly changed this picture. A notable exception is Maynard-Smith’s argument that the
distribution of functional proteins in (neutral) networks
in sequence space could facilitate adaptive evolution
(Maynard-Smith 1970). In a letter to Kimura, SewallWright addressed the question, to what extent can adaptive evolution benefit from neutral evolution? ‘‘Changes
in wholly nonfunctional parts of the molecule would be
the most frequent ones but would be unimportant, unless
they occasionally give a basis for later changes which
improve function in the species in question which would
then become established by selection’’ (Provine 1986).
Here we study the potential for Wright’s scenario: Can
neutral evolution facilitate adaptive evolution by increasing the number of phenotypes that can be reached with a
point mutation from an original phenotype?
An answer to this question requires detailed knowledge of genotype–phenotype relations. We use the mapping from RNA sequence to RNA secondary structure as
a paradigm for such a relation. The secondary structure
of a single-stranded RNA sequence is its pattern of
complementary base pairings (Watson-Crick and G-U
pairs). As opposed to the protein case, the secondary
structure of RNA sequences is relatively well defined; it
provides the major set of distance constraints that guide
the formation of tertiary structure and covers the dominant energy contribution to the 3D structure. RNA secondary structure represents a qualitatively important description of RNA, as is reflected in its conservation in
evolution and in the independent generation of ribozymes that share both secondary structure and function
(Ekland et al. 1995). This is not to say that secondary
structure is the only determinant of function; it is, however, often essential.
For relatively short RNA sequences the secondary
structure can be predicted using algorithms that minimize free energy of the base pairing and of a number of
other structural elements like hairpin loops and internal
loops (Zuker and Stiegler 1981). Using these algorithms
one can analyze how the secondary structures are dis
tributed over sequence space. The distribution of secondary structures over sequence space shows some remarkable features: There is a large redundancy in the mapping
from RNA sequences to RNA secondary structures: For
a sequence of length N, there are 4N sequences, whereas
there are about 1.8N structures (Waterman 1978; Schuster
et al. 1994). Furthermore, within the total set of secondary structures, only a small fraction dominates sequence
space. These relatively frequent secondary structures
form networks in sequence space, where a network is
defined as a set of sequences that fold into the same
structure and that are connected in sequence space
through point mutations (Schuster et al. 1994). On the
other hand, RNA landscapes are extremely rugged; randomly changing only 15% of the nucleotides gives rise to
a change in secondary structure that is no less than the
difference between the secondary structures of random
sequences (Fontana et al. 1993; Huynen et al. 1993). The
whole picture can be captured in the term ‘‘smoothness
within ruggedness’’; on average the landscape is very
rugged, but there exist paths that percolate through sequence space on which the secondary structure remains
unaltered. These properties of RNA landscapes are insensitive to whether the folding algorithm is thermodynamic, kinetic, or maximum matching (Tacker et al.
1996).
Perpetual Innovation Along the Neutral Net
We use the mapping between RNA sequence and RNA
secondary structure as a toy model for the mapping between genotype and phenotype. Within this model, point
mutations that leave the secondary structure unaltered
are called neutral mutations. A network of identical secondary structures in sequence space is called a neutral
net. Neutral evolution within this model is the process
where a population moves, due to mutations, genetic
drift, and selection, through sequence space over the neutral net of a specific secondary structure. To answer the
question of whether neutral evolution can change the
potential for adaptive evolution, it is essential to know
whether the secondary structures that neighbor the neutral net are different for various positions on the net. That
is to say: Does neutral evolution give access to new,
previously unencountered structures? We performed a
walk on the neutral net for a tRNAphe clover-leaf secondary structure and recorded all the different secondary
structures that were encountered as one-point mutants of
the net (Fig. 1). The total number of structures encountered increased linearly in time, with every neutral mutation giving access to, on average, 18.1 new structures.
The number of new accessible structures per mutation
we call the ‘‘rate of innovation.’’ One can compare the
rate of innovation along the neutral net with the number
of new structures observed along a purely random walk
through sequence space, where the secondary structure is
not conserved. For sequences of the length of tRNAphe
(76 nucleotides), we observed an average of 39 new accessible structures per step in the random walk. Hence,
restricting the walk to the neutral net reduces the rate of
innovation by a factor of two to three. The reduction in
the rate of innovation, however, is insignificant in comparison to the fraction of sequence space that can be
accessed from the neutral net. An upper bound to the
number of sequences that fold into a tRNAphe secondary
structure is the number of sequences that are compatible
with a tRNAphe secondary structure; i.e., the number of
sequences that have the potential for base pairing at the
positions at which the tRNAphe secondary structure has
base pairs. A tRNAphe secondary structure has 20 base
pairs and 36 unpaired positions. Given that there are 6
different base pairs (G–C, C–G, A–U, U–A, G–U, U–G),
there are 620 × 436 4 1.7 × 1037 sequences compatible
with a tRNAphe secondary structure. In a set of randomly
generated tRNAphe compatible sequences we observed
that less than one in 10,000 had a tRNAphe minimum free
energy structure (P < 0.001). The fraction of sequence
space that folds into a tRNAphe secondary structure can
then be estimated to be less than 0.0001 × 1.7 × 1037/476
4 3 × 10−13. Hence the reduction in the rate of innovation that is caused by restricting the random walk to
sequences with a tRNAphe secondary structures is negligible compared to the reduction in accessible sequences.
These results show that Wright’s scenario is plausible;
neutral changes can ‘‘set the stage’’ for a mutation that
leads to a better-adapted structure. Moreover, for any
reasonable time scale we do not observe a saturation in
the number of secondary structures that can be observed
along the neutral walk. This is the main point of this
article.
Besides depending on secondary structure, RNA
function also relies on primary (e.g., the anticodon in
tRNAs) and tertiary structure. Analyzing a rate of innovation with respect to other properties goes beyond the
scope of this paper, and is, as far as tertiary structure is
concerned, computationally not feasible. We can analyze
to some extent, however, how extra constraints on the
primary and tertiary structure will affect the innovation
rate at the level of the secondary structure. Extra constraints on the structure will in general lower the rate of
innovation: Less potential for neutral mutations reduces
the rate at which the walk progresses through sequence
space and encounters new structures. We observed that
conserving nucleotides at the anticodon positions led to
rates of innovation of 17.7 (GGG) and 16.6 (AAA). The
tertiary base-pair interactions that can be simulated to
some extent are pseudoknots. Conserving two or three
pair of complementary bases between the first and third
hairpin-loop of the clover-leaf led to innovation rates of
19.2 and 19.1, respectively. Finally, the simultaneous
conservation of both a GGG in the anticodon loop and
three complementary bases between the first and third
hairpin-loop led to an innovation rate of 19.7. These
results show that extra constraints do not always reduce the rate of innovation. Constraints on the single-stranded
regions force the neutral walk to accept more mutations
in double-stranded regions, which increases the rate of
innovation. What is more important than the actual rates
of innovation, however, is that they remained linear under all the constraints that were tested.
Our model of neutrality only concerns the minimum
free energy structure. Biologically functional secondary
structures are often ‘‘well-defined’’: base pairs in their
minimum free energy structure have, compared to the
base pairs in the secondary structures of random sequences, a relatively high probability of occurring within
the entire Boltzmann ensemble (Huynen et al. 1996b).
Since only a subset of the sequences with a specific
minimum free energy structure fold into that structure
with a relatively high probability, constraints on this
probability would reduce the neutrality and are expected
to reduce the rate of innovation.
Correlations in Structure Space
One might argue that the existence of a rate of innovation
is no more than a logical result of the fact that neutral
networks percolate sequence space. Although the presence of percolating networks is certainly a necessary
condition for the above, it is not sufficient. One could
envision a scenario in which the secondary structures
that neighbor the net are part of a relatively small subset
of all the secondary structures. Evolution then could get
stuck on a neutral ridge instead of a neutral peak. To
assess whether there is something like a small subset of
secondary structures that neighbors tRNAphe secondary
structures, we performed the same neutral walk experiment as above, but now, instead of counting new, unobserved structures, we counted structures that had been
observed before. We determined how the number of
equal structures that neighbor the net depends on the
number of neutral mutations between the sequences on
the net. In Fig. 2 we show that the number of neighboring
secondary structures that two sequences that fold into a
tRNAphe structure have in common depends strongly on
the distance between those two sequences in sequence
space and saturates to a low level of about six common
neighboring secondary structures as the sequences approach the distance between random sequences. Hence
there appear indeed to be some structures that are often
close to tRNAphe structures. We generated 1,000 independent sequences that fold into a tRNAphe secondary
structure using a reverse folding algorithm (Hofacker et
al. a). In Fig. 3 we plot the frequency distribution for
secondary structures that neighbor these sequences.
Some structures are nearly always neighboring the
tRNAphe secondary structures (in more than 80% of the
sequences). Not surprisingly, these structures turn out to
be relatively similar to the tRNAphe secondary structure;
the most frequent ones are at a distance of one base pair
to the tRNAphe structure. However, most of the structures
that neighbor tRNAphe structures are unique; out of the
total of 6 × 104 different secondary structures that neighbor the 1,000 independent tRNAphe structures, only
3,099 occurred more than once. The recurrence of structures that are similar to the structure on the neutral net is
in accordance with earlier results where it was shown
that most of the secondary structures that neighbor a
single sequence/secondary structure are relatively similar
to that structure (Huynen et al. 1993; Fontana et al.
1993).

The structures that occur relatively often near a
tRNAphe secondary structure complement the picture that
was sketched in the first part of this article, where we
observed perpetual innovation along the neutral net. Here
we observe that besides the innovation, there is also conservation. The tRNAphe secondary-structure neutral net
casts a shadow in structure space of a set of relatively
similar secondary structures. This type of correlation in
structure space shows that the phenomenon of perpetual
innovation is not trivial. If the correlation were too high,
neutral evolution would only be able to reach a very
limited subset of structures from any single neutral net.
As it turns out this is not the case; neutral evolution at the
level of secondary structure gives access to a virtually
unlimited number of structures and can thus play an important role in adaptive evolution. A scenario of adaptive
evolution where a population evolves over a (suboptimal) neutral net until it encounters another net with a
better secondary structure, after which it relocalizes to
this new net, was observed in simulations of adaptive
evolution on a fitness landscape that was based on RNA
secondary structure (Huynen et al. 1996a).