The origin of the supernumerary subunits and assembly factors of complex I: A treasure trove of pathway evolution

Highlights
•
Evolutionarily conserved signaling intermediate in Toll pathways (ECSIT) contains PPR repeats, suggesting RNA binding

•
COX4/5b has evolved from NDUFS6.

•
Documentation and review of protein family membership of supernumerary subunits and assembly factors

•
Documentation and review of the conservation of critical residues in supernumerary subunits and assembly factors

•
Early metazoan origin of the mitochondrial complex I assembly (MCIA) complex

Abstract
We review and document the evolutionary origin of all complex I assembly factors and nine supernumerary subunits from protein families. Based on experimental data and the conservation of critical residues we identify a spectrum of protein function conservation between the complex I representatives and their non-complex I homologs. This spectrum ranges from proteins that have retained their molecular function but in which the substrate specificity may have changed or have become more specific, like NDUFAF5, to proteins that have lost their original molecular function and critical catalytic residues like NDUFAF6. In between are proteins that have retained their molecular function, which however appears unrelated to complex I, like ACAD9, or proteins in which amino acids of the active site are conserved but for which no enzymatic activity has been reported, like NDUFA10. We interpret complex I evolution against the background of molecular evolution theory. Complex I supernumerary subunits and assembly factors appear to have been recruited from proteins that are mitochondrial and/or that are expressed when complex I is active. Within the evolution of complex I and its assembly there are many cases of neofunctionalization after gene duplication, like ACAD9 and TMEM126B, one case of subfunctionalization: ACPM1 and ACPM2 in Yarrowia lipolytica, and one case in which a complex I protein itself appears to have been the source of a new protein from another complex: NDUFS6 gave rise to cytochrome c oxidase subunit COX4/COX5b. Complex I and its assembly can therewith be regarded as a treasure trove for pathway evolution. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled Respiratory complex I, edited by Volker Zickermann and Ulrich Brandt.

Keywords
Complex I Assembly factors Supernumerary subunits Pathway evolution ECSIT Neofunctionalization

1. Introduction
NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase, or complex I, the first and largest of the oxidative phosphorylation complexes, has, for a long time been a poster child for molecular evolutionary studies. There are a number of reasons for this: The alphaproteobacterial origin of complex I and that some of its proteins are still mitochondrially encoded, has allowed its use in establishing that mitochondria evolved from the alphaproteobacteria [1], while its slower evolving nuclear encoded genes have been used to pinpoint the mitochondrial origin in the Rickettsiales order [2]. The question why some hydrophobic proteins, including complex I subunits, are mitochondrially encoded has been the subject of a long debate [3]. In this debate, recent experimental results support the old hypothesis that those hydrophobic proteins would be mistargeted to the endoplasmic reticulum when nuclear encoded [3], [4]. The determination of the composition of complex I in various bacteria and eukaryotes in combination with the high rate of evolution of some of its eukaryotic subunits, have spurred in depth studies into the gain and loss of complex I subunits along various evolutionary lineages [5], [6]. The homology of separate parts of complex I to independently functioning protein complexes in bacteria has led to its proposed evolution out of three, independently functioning modules, which has enriched our conceptual understanding of the evolution of complex pathways [7]. Evolutionary sequence conservation of complex I proteins is used to derive hypotheses of how complex I couples electron transfer to proton translocation [8]. Complex I′s frequent evolutionary loss has made it a suitable subject for co-evolution studies, and its intimate biochemical connection to central carbohydrate metabolism was recently confirmed by a large scale analysis of its co-evolution with metabolic pathways in bacteria [9]. In eukaryotes the coevolution of proteins with complex I has been used to predict new assembly factors [10], [11], expanding the number of complex I proteins involved in congenital disease [12]. The evolution of complex I has also led to some surprises. One is its occurrence in anaerobic hydrogen producing mitochondria [13], [14]. A second one is the documentation of a mitochondrial genome from an aerobic multicellular species that lacks complex I genes [15], strongly suggesting the absence of the complex from its mitochondria. Most of these aspects have already been addressed and sometimes debated in reviews, or are extensively discussed in the various papers describing new experimental or computational results. We therefore decided to focus on an aspect that, although addressed in one of the earliest publications discussing complex I proteins' evolutionary relationships [16], has not recently been reviewed: the evolution of complex I supernumerary subunits and the assembly factors from pre-existing protein families.

1.1. An accumulation of new subunits and assembly factors along multiple evolutionary lineages
Homology detection, and its daughter orthology detection that increases the likelihood of detecting functionally equivalent proteins [17] are one of the cornerstones of bioinformatics. Purely based on experimental data, the number of complex I subunits increased from 14 in proteobacteria [18], to 17 in alphaproteobacteria [19], 44 in mammals [20], [21], 49 in plants [22], 42 in Chlamydomonas[23], and at least 46 in Trypanosoma[24]. Orthology detection, using increasingly sensitive sequence analysis tools based on sequence profiles [25], has been intensively applied to compare the subunit composition of complex I between species and has revealed that the large majority of the so-called “supernumerary” subunits are actually shared between the taxa [5], [6], [26]. In a recent example, the number of subunits that were deemed to be specific to Trypanosoma[24] has gone down by comparison with the proteome of Euglena gracilis[27]. As horizontal gene transfer does not appear to play a role in complex I evolution in eukaryotes, in contrast to prokaryotes [9], we can infer that most supernumerary subunits that are shared between the major evolutionary lineages were added before the radiation of the eukaryotes, in the so-called Last Eukaryotic Common Ancestor (LECA) [6]. This pattern of a dramatic increase in the number of subunits in LECA is not unique to complex I and has been observed in all mitochondrial protein complexes of bacterial origin [26]. In contrast, the loss of complex I subunits is rare and has only been documented for one subunit in the lineage leading to the mammals: the carbonic anhydrase that can be inferred to have been part of complex I in LECA but is absent from it in metazoa and fungi [28]. The only subunits that currently appear to be unique to the metazoa are NDUFA10, NDUFB6, NDUFV3, NDUFC1 and NDUFB1. The latter two have been suggested to be homologous to the fungal subunits NUUM and NUXM respectively [6]. Nevertheless, also with sequence profiles based on the latest sequence data they do not show significant levels of sequence similarity to those (data not shown) and their homology will have to be decided by structure data. The successful efforts in mapping the supernumerary subunits from the eukaryotes onto each other do however not explain where the supernumerary subunits came from in the first place. Many complex I supernumerary subunits appear in evolution “out of the blue”: i.e. we cannot find homologs that are not also orthologs. However, all assembly factors and nine supernumerary subunits are part of larger protein families, providing sometimes revealing and often puzzling clues about their role in complex I. We document these relationships here (Table 1), complementing the published cases with a number of newly discovered ones that are based on sequence-profile based homology detection and on the conservation of sequence motifs documented to be involved in substrate binding and catalysis.

1.2.1. NDUFAB1
NDUFAB1 is an example of a supernumerary complex I protein that has retained its original molecular function. It is homologous to the acyl carrier proteins from bacteria, chloroplasts and mitochondria that are involved in fatty acid synthesis [29]. Acyl carrier proteins contain a DSL motif of which the serine binds 4′ phosphopantetheine that, in turn, can carry acyl groups via a thioester linkage to its sulfhydryl group. This DSL motif is conserved in human NDUFAB1 and in its orthologs of Neurospora crassa and Bos taurus that bind 4′ phosphopantetheine and an acyl group [30], [31]. Y. lipolytica has two NDUFAB1 homologs, ACPM1 and ACPM2, which are both bound to complex I [32]. The phosphopantetheine binding serine in ACPM1 is required for Y. lipolytica viability, while that serine in ACPM2 is required for complex I activity [32]. Mutagenesis aimed at just disturbing the binding of ACPM1 to complex I results in almost complete absence of ubiquinone reductase activity but is not lethal [33]. The more dramatic effect of the mutation in ACPM1 is therefore likely due to a role of ACPM1 in fatty acid synthesis, like its ortholog ACP1 [34] in the complex I less Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Recently also the bovine complex I has been shown to bind two ACP proteins [35], which are nevertheless encoded by a single gene. ACPM1 and ACPM2 in Y. lipolytica are not able to complement each other [32], making the gene duplication in an ancestor of Y. lipolytica that led to ACPM1 and ACPM2 a prime example of subfunctionalization: the two daughter genes have each adopted one of the functions of the mother gene. Although there are multiple NDUFAB1 homologs in Arabidopsis thaliana mitochondria, they do not appear to be part of complex I [36]. This taxon-specific association of a protein to complex I is unique to NDUFAB1. For the other complex I proteins, when they are encoded in the genome of a species with complex I, the protein has been observed to be part of the complex [6].

1.2.2. NDUFA2
NDUFA2 has a thioredoxin fold and includes in mammals and in plants two cysteines that in the oxidized form of the protein form a disulfide bond [37]. It is not known whether this disulfide bond has a function and it is not conserved in e.g. Caenorhabditis elegans or in the fungi [37]. The protein is homologous to supernumerary subunits of the mitochondrial ribosome L43, L53 and S25, in none of which those cysteines are present [37]. As L53 and NDUFA2 both date back to LECA [5], [38], we cannot make a distinction which of the two “came first”. Although the protein's 3D structure indicates that it is part of the thioredoxin protein family that is also present in the Bacteria, using homology detection based on sequence profile comparison techniques no bacterial homolog can be detected.

1.2.3. NDUFA10
NDUFA10 is homologous to deoxyribonucleoside kinases and contains the dNK (PF01712) domain in PFAM [39]. NDUFA10 appears to have originated early in metazoan evolution, having an ortholog in the one of the earliest branching and simplest metazoa, Trichoplax adhaerens (uniprot ID B3RQT8_TRIAD). Comparison of the NDUFA10 sequence with the structure of a human deoxycytidine kinase [40] indicates that the majority of amino acids surrounding the nucleoside binding pocket and the phosphate donor ATP are conserved in NDUFA10, while the overall level of identity between these proteins is only 27%. These conserved amino acids include the NDUFA10 residues E88, Y118, Q132, R161, D166 and E226 that in human deoxycytidine kinase bind the nucleoside and E160 that in deoxycytidine kinase has been inferred to be the proton acceptor active site (Fig. S1) [40]. The S250 residue, whose phosphorylation is required for ubiquinone reduction by complex I [41] is well conserved (Fig. 1). It cannot be aligned with a position in the nucleoside kinases (Fig. S1) and its insertion into the protein appears quite distant from the nucleoside binding pocket when examined in the 3D structure of human deoxycytidine kinase.

1.2.4. NDUFA9
A supernumerary subunit that was recruited at the origin of the eukaryotes is NDUFA9 [5]. It is part of the NAD dependent short chain dehydrogenase/reductase family [16]. Proteins in this family that function as oxidoreductases like the WbmG of Bordetella bronchiseptica[42] have an active site consisting of the S/T-Y-K catalytic triad. Of these residues the first one has been changed into a histidine in human NDUFA9, making the retaining of a catalytic function unlikely (Fig. 1a). Nevertheless, the other two residues, Y and K, are conserved in human. Although the tyrosine is not conserved within NDUFA9 orthologs like the one from N.crassa[16], the lysine is perfectly conserved (Fig. 1a).

1.2.5. NDUFS5, NDUFB7, NDUFA8 and NDUFB10
Subunits whose protein family membership is consistent with experimental evidence about their location in complex I are the subunits of the twin Cx(9)C family [43]: NDUFS5, NDUFB7 and NDUFA8. Based on their membership of a family that relies on disulfide bond formation they have been predicted to be localized on the intermembrane space side of complex I [44], a prediction that has been confirmed using biochemical analyses for NDUFB7 and NDUFA8 [44], while NDUFS5 and NDUFA8 have now been localized on the intermembrane side of complex I in its 3D structure [35]. NDUFB7 has tentatively also been located on the intermembrane space side of complex I but its location could still be interchanged with that of another supernumerary subunit, NDUFB10 [35]. NDUFB10 has only a single pair of conserved cysteines that potentially could form a disulfide bond, in contrast to NDUFS5, NDUFB7 and NDUFA8 that contain two disulfide bonds. Based on sequence analysis NDUFB10 cannot be placed in the twin Cx(9)C family. The distance between the two conserved cysteines (11 to 13 amino acids) in NDUFB10 orthologs is nevertheless similar to that between the “inner” cysteines in NDUFS5, NDUFB7 and NDUFA8. This suggests that NDUFB10 has a similar hairpin fold as the twin Cx(9)C family and that the “outer” cysteines were lost in the evolution of NDUFB10. However, among all the NDUFB10 orthologs we could not detect a single protein with a second pair of cysteines that would support this scenario.

1.2.6. NDUFA6 and NDUFB9
NDUFA6 and NDUFB9 are members of the LYR protein family that contains in human at least 10, mainly mitochondrial proteins [45]. Although some themes have been identified for the LYR family, e.g. they tend to interact with large mitochondrial complexes [45], these are not specific enough to inform us about the role of NDUFA6 and NDUFB9 in complex I. Two evolutionary conserved LYR motifs in the iron–sulfur cluster protein SDHB have been identified to interact with the iron–sulfur cluster assembly protein HSC20, while also two proteins of the LYR family, LYRM7 and LYRM8/SDHAF1, have been shown to interact with HSC20 [46]. The results suggest that LYR family proteins are involved in transferring iron–sulfur clusters from the IscU scaffold to recipient proteins [46] and raise the possibility that NDUFA6 and NDUFB9 are involved in FeS assembly in complex I. Another property that has been reported for NDUFA6 and NDUFB9 is their binding to the acyl carrier protein [33], [35]. This has, to the best of our knowledge, not been observed in other LYR proteins.

1.2.7. NDUFS6
NDUFS6 is part of the zf-CHCC family in PFAM [39], which has one other member in human, the complex IV subunit COX5b [19]. NDUFS6 and the yeast ortholog of human COX5b that is confusingly named COX4, have a C-terminal CX8-9HX14-15CX2C zinc finger motif. This motif has in NUMM, the Y. lipolytica ortholog of NDUFS6, been shown to bind a zinc atom [47], while also in COX4 the cysteines of the motif have been shown to be essential for zinc binding [48]. Compared to the three cysteines in the motif, the histidine appears to be less critical for zinc binding, both in NUMM [47] and in COX4 [48]. This might explain why it has been lost from COX5b in the metazoa (Fig. 2), having been “replaced” by a cysteine in bovine Cox5b [49]. NDUFS6 has an alphaproteobacterial ortholog that is part of complex I, PdNUMM of Paracoccusdenitrificans[19]. Also COX4's bacterial homologs are close relatives of PdNUMM. It therewith appears that COX4 has evolved from NDUFS6, by a gene duplication early in eukaryotic evolution (Fig. 2). In this case complex I, rather than obtaining a new subunit from a pathway or complex appears to actually have been the source of a protein from another complex.

1.3.1. NDUFAF1
Using profile-based homology search it becomes apparent that NDUFAF1(CIA30) is homologous to the non-catalytic carbohydrate binding modules (CBM) like CBM family 11 (Table 1). These modules have a beta-sandwich structure and are part or larger proteins that do have domains with catalytic functions. In those proteins the modules are involved in recognizing appropriate ligands for the catalytic domain and in localizing those domains onto the surface of the polysaccharide substrates [50]. Although this homology does not provide us with clues about NDUFAF1’s role in complex I assembly, it does provide us with an example of recruitment of a protein with a role in carbohydrate metabolism in the evolution of new assembly factors.

1.3.2. NDUFAF3 and NDUFAF6
NDUFAF3 and NDUFAF6 have orthologs in bacteria that together occur in a conserved operon with the genes YajC, SecD and SecF, that are involved in the insertion of proteins into the membrane [51]. This suggests that NDUFAF3 and NDUFAF6 might also be involved in membrane insertion. NDUFAF6 contains a squalene/phytoene synthase domain [10], suggesting a possible enzymatic activity [10]. However both in NDUFAF6 and in its bacterial orthologs that occur in (putative) operons with YajC, SecD, SecF, the residues that are at the active site and that are required for enzymatic activity of this family, like the two DxxxD motifs from dehydrosqualene synthase [52], are absent (Fig. 1b). NDUFAF3 contains the MTH938 domain that has no known molecular function and is named after the first protein of this family that was crystallized. It has a human homolog AAMDC that in protein atlas [53] is mainly localized in the nucleus and has been implicated in adipogenesis [54].

1.3.3. NDUFAF4
NDUFAF4 is homologous to Neugrin, a protein upregulated during neuronal differentiation [55] whose yeast ortholog, Rrg9 [56] is mitochondrial [57]. As the molecular function of Neugrin is not known, this does not provide us with clues about the function of NDUFAF4. It does however fit with the theme that assembly factors are homologous to other mitochondrial proteins.

1.3.4. NDUFAF5 and NDUFAF7
NDUFAF5 and NDUFAF7 are two assembly factors that have a conserved enzymatic function. They contain an S-adenosylmethionine-dependent methyltransferase domain, including the GxGxG signature sequence, an S-adenosylmethionine-binding motif found in almost all SAM-dependent methyltransferases [58]. In NDUFAF5 the first glycin of this motif has been shown to be required for complex I activity in the Dictyostelium discoideum ortholog of NUDUFAF5 [59]. Also in NDUFAF7, site-directed mutagenesis of glycines from the motif impairs complex I activity [60], while human NDUFAF7 has been shown to methylate the evolutionary conserved arginine-85 in complex I subunit NDUFS2 [61]. Although NDUFAF5 and NDUFAF7 are homologous to each other, they have independent origins in the alphaproteobacteria. NDUFAF5 has evolved from BioC in alphaproteobacteria to which it is actually orthologous [59] and it is part of the PFAM methyltransferase 23 family. Its most similar bacterial homolog for which we have experimental data is BioC from Escherichia coli. BioC is involved in biotin synthesis, likely by transferring a methyl group to malonyl attached to an Acyl Carrier Protein [62]. Biotin synthesis in the alphaproteobacterium Mesorhizobium is however different from that in E.coli[63]. The gene BioZ has taken the place of the BioC and BioH genes in the biotin operon, and a BioZ mutant makes them biotin auxotroph, even though a BioC homolog is present in the genome [63]. Furthermore, BioC from alphaproteobacteria cannot complement BioC from E.coli (John Cronan, personal communication) indicating that the BioC homolog from Mesorhizobium is not involved in biotin production. Nevertheless, there is no evidence that BioC is (already) involved in complex I in alphaproteobacteria. NDUFAF7 is part of the Methyltransferase 28 family. We did not detect reasonably similar homologs (> 30% identity with NDUFAF7) with experimentally characterized substrate specificities in bacteria.

1.3.5. ACAD9
Another example of an assembly factor with a conserved catalytic function is ACAD9. ACAD9 was originally thought to date back to the origin of the vertebrates, having resulted from a duplication of the very long chain acyl dehydrogenase VLCAD [64]. The protein is absent from arthropoda but can now, in the Treefam database, also be found in non-vertebrate metazoa like the flatworm Schistosoma mansoni[65], thus dating back to the root of the metazoa. Interestingly, in the flatworms Echinococcus granulosus and Clonorchis sinensis the ACAD9 gene is fused with an ortholog of NDUFAF3 (Fig. 3) suggesting that these two complex I assembly factors were already involved in the same process in early branching metazoa. Curiously, in ACAD9 the active site of the ancestral very long chain acyl dehydrogenase appears still to be present in the protein [64]. Furthermore, the enzyme has retained acyl dehydrogenase activity [66] and the level of residual activity after a mutation appears to inversely correlate with disease severity in humans [67].

1.3.6. IND1/NUBPL
Another assembly factor that has retained its ancestral active site and activity is IND1/NUBPL [68]. This protein that is involved in the assembly of FeS clusters in complex I has bacterial ancestors [68] for which we have experimental data. The bacterial homolog ApbC does appear to be involved in transfer of [4Fe-4S] clusters [69], but there are no data linking it to complex I. In IND1, NUBPL and the A. thaliana ortholog named INDH, the motifs associated with activity have been conserved [68], [70]. It should be noted that the bacterial homologs of IND1, including ApbC, have an N-terminal DUF59 domain that is lacking from eukaryotic orthologs of IND1 (Fig. 4). Apparently it has been lost in the endosymbiosis. DUF59 is present in a number of other eukaryotic proteins that are involved in FeS assembly [71], but its molecular function has not been elucidated.

1.3.7. ECSIT
The N-terminal half of assembly factor ECSIT is significantly similar to the Pentatricopeptide repeat (PPR) (Fig. 5), a motif that has often been observed in proteins from mitochondria and plastids. Human PPRs tend to bind RNA and to be involved in gene expression [72]. Nevertheless no RNA binding for ECSIT has been reported, and the protein binding partners of ECSIT that have been detected [73], [74] are not enriched for RNA binding proteins. This observation increases the number of PPR repeat proteins in human mitochondria that stood at seven [72] to eight. The presence of short, evolutionary widespread and phylogenetically non-informative sequence like the PPR hampers orthology prediction. By contrast the C-terminal domain of ECSIT is unique to ECSIT and occurs only in metazoa and in their single cell relatives like Capsaspora owczarzaki (uniprot ID: A0A0D2VSR5), indicating that ECSIT itself is also limited to this taxon, the filozoa.

1.3.8. NDUFAF2 and TIMMDC1
Most of the complex I assembly factors appear to have been recruited from independent sources. The exceptions are two assembly factors that are homologous to complex I proteins themselves: NDUFAF2 that is homologous to NDUFA12 [5] and TIMMDC1/C3orf1 that is homologous to NDUFA11 [75], [76] and to the Tim17–23 family. Both TIMMDC1 and NDUFA11 have, based on this homology been speculated to play a role in the membrane insertion of complex I, just like other members of the Tim17–23 family [76]. Indeed, the A. thaliana ortholog of NDUFA11 (At2g42210) has been shown to both be part of complex I and to occur with Tim71 and Tim23 in a translocase of the inner membrane complex [77], while NDUFA11 itself has been argued to function as an assembly factor in human cells [75]. With respect to the homology between NDUFAF2 and NDUFA12, the experimental data suggest another possible explanation than having the same molecular function: NDUFAF2 and NDUFA12 might take the same position in the complex, with NDUFAF2 (temporarily) holding the location of NDUFA12. Experimental data that support this model are that in N.crassa the dissociation of NDUFAF2 from the nascent complex depends on the incorporation of the three proteins of the N module of complex I that include NDUFA12 [78], while in a Y. lipolytica strain from which the NDUFS6 ortholog has been deleted, a complex I assembly intermediate can be observed that lacks the NDUFA12 but does contain NDUFAF2 [47]. A function for NDUFAF2 in which it temporarily holds the location of NDUFA12 is consistent with a similar location of NDUFAF2 and NDUFA12 in a 3D topology of complex I and its assembly factors that was predicted based on co-evolution analyses [79].

1.3.9. FOXRED1
FOXRED1 is an example of protein linked to the assembly of complex I [80] that has maintained its cofactor binding residues. In this specific case, its most similar homolog with experimentally determined function is DauA from Pseudomonas aeruginosa. DauA is an FAD-dependent dehydrogenase that catalyzes the flavin-dependent oxidative deamination of d-arginine [81], the first step required for the D-to-L racemization. Although originally characterized as an arginine specific enzyme, it actually has a broad substrate specificity [82]. The conserved amino acids between FOXRED1 and DauA (Fig. 1c) bind FAD in DauA [82]. By contrast, the residues responsible for binding the d-amino acid for its oxidative deamination are not conserved (data not shown), and although a new catalytic function has been suggested for FOXRED1 [83], there are no experimental data supporting that. FOXRED1's role as an assembly factor of complex I appears to be relatively recent or, at least, not as old as the eukaryotes; it is absent from some eukaryotes with complex I, while orthologs are present in species without complex I [84].

1.3.10. TMEM126B
TMEM126, the most recently discovered complex I assembly factor [75], [85] is evolutionarily also the youngest. In mammalian genomes it neighbors its paralog TMEM126A, a protein of the mitochondrial inner membrane with no known molecular function [86]. TMEM126B does not occur outside of the mammals, and likely resulted from a segmental duplication. Examining its phylogeny (Fig. 6) indicates a long branch length at TMEM126B's origin, indicating accelerated evolution after the gene duplication. Such a long branch length has also been observed at the origin of ACAD9 [64]. It is often an indication of positive selection, reflecting the gain of a new function, but can also indicate loss of constraint on the function of the protein [87].

2. Discussion
Although assembly factors and supernumerary subunits of complex I appear to have evolved from many independent sources, two patterns do stand out: 1) they are homologous to other mitochondrial proteins and 2) some of the assembly factors (NDUFAF1, NDUFAF6 and ACAD9) have evolved from proteins involved in lipid- or carbohydrate metabolism. The reasons for this might actually be quite prosaic: mitochondrial proteins are already in the same compartment as complex I while lipid- and carbohydrate metabolism genes are present in species with complex I genes [9] and one expects them to be expressed when complex I is expressed. In other words carbohydrate metabolism genes and mitochondrial proteins provide a suitable substrate of the evolution of new functions in complex I. With respect to the cases in which active sites of enzymes have been conserved in the assembly factors, the evolution matches Jensen's model for pathway evolution [88], recruitment of the required enzyme activity on a new substrate. In the other cases, evolution appears to have been even more opportunistic, just the presence of the protein appears to be enough to make it a candidate for the evolution of a new function. The homology of complex I supernumerary subunits and assembly factors to other mitochondrial proteins does match a pattern of “intra-organellar homology” that is general for mitochondrial proteins [89] including other OxPhos supernumerary subunits [3].

In complex I evolution, there appears to be a range of possibilities with respect to the conservation of the original function of a protein when it becomes part of complex I or its assembly. On the one end of this range is NDUFAB1, a protein that appears to have maintained its molecular function while adopting a role in complex I. Next there are proteins that have conserved their original enzymatic function but have switched or narrowed down their substrate specificity to complex I, like the methyltransferases NDUFAF5 and NDUFAF7, the iron–sulfur cluster assembly protein IND1/NUBPL and TIMMDC1. In the middle of this spectrum there are proteins that have retained their active site and enzymatic activity, but in which that activity has no known link to their function in complex I assembly, like ACAD9. Then there are proteins that have retained (aspects) of their active site but for which no enzymatic activity has been reported, like NDUFA10. Finally there are proteins that appear to have lost their active site and original function altogether, like NDUFAF6. It should thereby be noted that recruitment of active enzymes to complex I assembly is not limited to metazoa. In A. thaliana, the l-Galactono-1,4-lactone dehydrogenase is required for complex I assembly and has been found to be associated with its assembly intermediates [90].

All assembly factors' proteins have a recognizable homolog outside complex I, while only nine out of the 30 supernumerary subunits do. One explanation for this is that some assembly factors are relatively young. The youngest assembly factors, TMEM126B (mammals), Ecsit (filozoa), and Acad9 (metazoa), are part of the mitochondrial complex I assembly (MCIA) complex [85], together with NDUFAF1 that dates back to the origin of the eukaryotes. In contrast to this evolutionary young complex stand the assembly factors like IND1/NUBP, and the two methylases NDUFAF5 and NDUFAF7 that date back to the bacteria and for which we often do not know when in evolution their function became directly relevant to complex I. We should thereby keep in mind that, from a purely phylogenetic point of view, complex I mitochondria and complex I in alphaproteobacteria are closer related to each other than either is to that in e.g. gamma-proteobacteria. Some of the assembly factors, like NDUFAF5 that lost its role in biotin synthesis in alphaproteobacteria, may already have a played a role in complex I assembly in alphaproteobacteria. It would therefore be interesting to study complex I assembly in alphaproteobacteria as a simple model system for that in mitochondria.

