Here Wentao Ma and colleagues continue their series of modeling studies of various aspects of the putative primordial RNA world. The current installment is based on the old idea of Diener that viroids are relics of the RNA world. Certainly, this is an attractive idea given that these are indeed the simplest known replicators, and they are stable small RNAs which is important for RNA World models. The new idea introduced by Wentao Ma and colleagues is the self-cleavage of a viroid-like circular RNA molecule into smaller molecules with various potential activities, via the action of built-in hammerhead ribozymes. There is no precedent for this among modern RNAs but neither is there anything biologically or chemically implausible about this model. There is actually little doubt that such a molecule can be produced experimentally, and its properties will be of interest. Certainly, a merit of the model.

Wentao Ma then proceeded to develop a Monte Carlo-type model of a replicator system consisting of such viroid-like molecules and claim that the result revealed robustness and viability of this type of replicators systems. This reviewer's attitude to this kind of models is ambivalent. On the one hand, it is clear that (almost) everything depends on parameterization, and with some combinations of parameters, nearly any outcome is possible. On the other hand, the model is not useless because it shows that such replicator systems can exist in a large domain of the parameter space.

So on the whole, this is an interesting hypothesis. I am surprised Wentao Ma and colleagues do not mention Hepatitis Delta virus which is the largest known replicating circular RNA molecule and encodes a protein, thus perhaps resembling the primordial genomes that bridged the RNA World and the more advanced RNA-protein World.

Thus, there is nothing overtly wrong with the scenario put forward by Wentao Ma and colleagues, and moreover, I think it is more ingenious than many other models that circulate in the origin of life field. Except perhaps for one fundamental issue: all of this conceivably could have happened as outlined in the model, only there is not a shred of evidence it actually happened this way. A general problem with models of primordial evolution, not to be held against the authors.