The importance of the code evolution problem cannot be overemphasized. In a sense, this is the central problem in the study of life or, at least, life's evolution (but, "nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution"), the rest is more or less history. The history of the problem itself is quite long, starting with Woese's prescient papers and book of 1965–67. This year we celebrate the 40th anniversary of Crick's 1968 on code evolution. Considering the 40+ years history of the study of code evolution, it is rather shocking to contemplate how little progress has been made as the same questions are addressed today that were the subject of Woese's and Crick's thinking in the 1960ies. Admittedly, the analyses have become much more precise and rigorous. A major part of this methodological tightening is brought about by code cost/fitness functions first introduced by Hurst et al. in the early 1990ies and subsequently modified and elaborated by several researchers. In this paper Higgs extends the cost functions to include codes with fewer than 20 amino acids, a development that provides for exploring the effect of expanding a putative primordial code by recruiting new amino acids. Under a set of reasonable assumptions, the paper shows that, if the code expansion proceeds along a path of minimal disruption of protein structure (maximum robustness to mistranslation), that is, codon sub-series are captured by amino acids similar to the original ones, the code expansion is either outright beneficial or, at worst, very mildly deleterious, hence plausible as an evolutionary scenario. Higgs concludes that "the driving force during this process is not the minimization of translation error, but positive selection for the increased diversity and functionality of the proteins that can be made with a larger amino acid alphabet."

As a general scheme of code evolution, this makes perfect sense. I would only emphasize that this scenario does not render the minimization of translation error "unimportant", but rather incorporates this factor as a constraint that shapes the structure of the code during the expansion of the amino acid alphabet. However, the scenario proposed by Higgs is very specific, with particular amino acids being proposed for each phase of the code evolution. This increases the value of the work but of course, at the same time, makes it more vulnerable to criticism. The scenario starts with a GNN code that encodes only four early amino acids, V, A, D, and G (the plausibility of the appearance of these amino acids on primordial earth is supported by new, apparently very thorough survey by the author himself, and this is of course a strength of the paper), and is rapidly expanded into a 4-column code with the same amino acid alphabet. I am not sure why the transient GNN stage that, as acknowledged by Higgs, does not yield to robust translation, is necessary. It seems to me that the scenario could just as well start directly from the 4-column code, thus avoiding the dubious stage with 48 unassigned codons. Furthermore, it is unclear to me whether or not this scenario has any advantages over the early ideas of Woese and others on the ambiguity of primordial codes whereby multiple codon series initially would collectively – and ambiguously – encode several similar amino acids so that the subsequent evolution of the code would involve (mostly) specialization rather than actual codon reassignment (see Woese [15,16]). It would be interesting to explicitly encode this model using modern approaches and see how it performs.

More generally, this study shares the essential features of all models of the emergence and early evolution of the code: a reasonable scenario is proposed and carefully explored but there can be no guarantee that this is a necessary scenario. Indeed, as noticed by Higgs, the scenario presented in this paper is compatible with the latest versions of the coevolution hypothesis, and perhaps, with other concepts as well. So are we learning anything substantial about the origin and evolution of the code? I think there is an important message, and this is born out by Higgs's analysis: robustness to translation error is a critically important factor of the code evolution, whether it is considered in terms of direct adaptation or as constraint. Nothing particularly new, the idea was present in Woese's publications over 40 years ago, but I believe this is now established beyond reasonable doubt, and this is certainly worth noting.

Finally, I would note that this careful and interesting study, as well as other studies of the code evolution conducted in the same tradition, by virtue of their design, does not address the central question: how did the coding principle itself evolve? This is a huge problem that can be reasonably approached only in conjunction with the origin of the translation systems, and despite a variety of ideas, there is so far no clear path the putative primordial RNA world to the more modern-like RNA-protein world (see Wolf and Koonin EV [58], and references therein). Once again, no attempt to criticize the present work, just trying to clarify my view of the state of the art in the study of the code evolution.