1. Overlapping genes are an old and appealing topic, tracing back to the startling discovery of 'genes within genes' in small bacteriophages by Sanger et al. back in 1977. However, the subsequent history of the study of this phenomenon has been somewhat anticlimactic because it turns out that long overlaps are, after all, not that common in cellular life forms (or even in viruses with larger genomes), and the longest ones reported have the unpleasant habit to go away as artifacts. However, the apparent lack of a truly essential biological role of overlaps – beyond very short overlaps involved in regulatory compression as discussed in the present paper – is not to diminish their theoretical interest. Even if the sequences of overlap are rather short, they do carry two messages in the same string of nucleotides, and an extensive analysis of such sequences on genome scale has the potential to reveal aspects of selection and neutrality that escape our attention in the study of "normal" genes.

The paper of Lillo and Krakauer is, to my knowledge, the most comprehensive and nuanced analysis of this kind to date, and beyond any doubt, will be a useful addition to the literature. Of course, I do have a variety of comments that might be of some use for revision or could just help the interested reader to become better oriented in this rather complex tangle of problems.

2. First a couple of very general issues. The work would greatly benefit from a more extensive and more explicit analysis of the evolutionary conservation of overlapping regions (ORs). This would make a lot of sense both methodologically, by increasing the reliability of the results, and substantively. Indeed, it is interesting to see how the evolutionary conservation varies among different orientations and phases of ORs, are there some ORs that are conserved in a broad range of prokaryotes, and more questions like that.

More or less along similar lines, it would make sense to present more information on possible lineage-specific trends in ORs. Is there some interesting biology here or are the characteristics of ORs just a function of genome size and gene density? If it is the latter, it is worth illustrating and stating explicitly. All the more so if it is the former.

3. In the Background section, the authors discuss the mutational origins of overlaps and the interplay of neutral or adaptive processes in their evolution. However, I think it is rather important to explain right away the range of the phenomenon and to make distinction between viral overlapping genes where many occasions of actual "genes within genes" and prokaryotic overlaps that are (predominantly) very short.

4. Variational benefits...this is an old, somewhat tired issue on the reality of "evolution of evolvability", evolution having no foresight etc etc. The authors present this as a fully legitimate, regular evolutionary force. Perhaps, some extra caution and more discussion are due.

5. The issue of selection for genome compression – not regulatory compression (with which I have no problem) but replication rate. This is very obvious and one of the first things that comes to mind when one considers the raison d'etre for overlaps. But is it real or, at least, is it particularly important and general? How much sequence can be actually saved through overlaps? Fig. ​Fig.2a2a shows values > 10 kb for 5 genomes; whether this is a lot or not really depends on the size of the respective genomes (by the way, is it worth to show the same data after normalizing by genome size?) One can sort of get the hang of it by comparing Fig. ​Fig.2a2a and Fig. ​Fig.2b2b but it is not, exactly, straightforward. In any case, for the great majority of the genomes, the total length of the overlaps is much less. I understand it is no easy question but could there be any way to assess the selective advantages conferred by this amount of compression against the obvious disadvantages of overlaps (assuming they are not subject to other types of selection)? Also, if compression is so important, why no genes within genes? We know from viruses that this is not impossible.

6. The rather notorious issue of long overlaps. It is possible that I am overly cautious but I am worried over the right tail of the distribution in Fig. ​Fig.1b.1b. Clearly, there are only a few points in this area, and even a small number of artifacts would sway the curve away from the exponent. At least, I think this issue should be given more attention.

7. The explanation of the striking under-representation of divergent overlaps given on p. 11 (and in ref. [25]) is, probably, correct. The point, I believe is that the constellation of regulatory elements that are required for the initiation of both transcription and translation is much more demanding than that required for termination. Hence the strong purifying selection against divergent but not so much against convergent overlaps. By the way, an interesting thing to check: are convergent overlaps in prokaryotes seen primarily in genes with rho-dependent or rho-independent termination? Sequence requirements for the two are very different.

8. In the discussion of phase frequencies – relating to the issue of long overlaps once again. I am very worried about the "crossing" at length 75. How many points there, after all?

9. In the conclusions it would be desirable to indicate that, alas, there is no good way to distinguish between the adaptationist and neutral explanations or any combination thereof. Under these circumstances, is it not prudent to take the neutral explanation as the null hypothesis?