The paper develops a scenario for the origin of eukaryotes under which protoeukaryotes started off as cheaters in prokaryotic biofilms, then shed the characteristic prokaryotic cell walls and so became phagocytes, then turned into "professional predators", and then engulfed the alpha-proteobacterial ancestor of the mitochondria; the mitochondrial endosymbiosis triggered the evolution of other major eukaryotic innovations, such as the nucleus.

This is not at all an unreasonable scenario, and if the principal message is that eukaryotes evolved in tightly knit microbial communities, such as biofilms, I tend to agree. Also, I accept the fact that all currently known eukaryotes have mitochondria or remnants thereof does not necessarily imply that the mitochondrial endosymbiosis was the event that triggered the emergence of all major eukaryotic innovations. It is, indeed, in principle, conceivable that phagocytosis antedated endosymbiosis. However, the specific succession of stages from a prokaryotic cheater to the protoeukaryote reads like a "just so story": everything is plausible but there is no specific evidence in support of any of the steps.

Furthermore, the elaborate succession of steps is, exactly, what bothers me. If cheating is such an advantageous strategy and phagocytosis is so good for social prokaryotes, why are we not aware of any prokaryotes that have been locked during their evolution in one of these stages?

Generally, we do not know of any prokaryotic phagocytes which seems to be better compatible with the emergence of phagocytosis not before but after the critical event that was the start of eukaryogenesis...and acquisition of mitochondria looks like the best candidate for the role of such an event. So we go full circle: the hypothesis presented here is reasonable, even plausible, it is just that the evidence is not there. Or, is it the case that cheating prokaryotes capable of phagocytosis, actually, are there but are relatively rare and hard to cultivate? Perhaps, they could be discovered, e.g., in poorly studied archaeal biofilms? That would completely change the status of the present paper, and perhaps, even our understanding of the origin of eukaryotes in general. In the section on "Testing the hypothesis", it might be useful to be somewhat more explicit about this crucial validation of the proposed scenario.

About mitochondria as the best candidates: is there any evidence there that they came before endomembranes? I am not aware of any. This discussion somewhat reminds me of the 'contingency' versus 'convergence' debate of Gould and Conway Morris. According to the contingency scenario, the uptake of mitochondria was a unique and low-probability event that then triggered eukaryogenesis. In contrast, the convergence scenario would state that predators always appear when there is food to be ingested, i.e. eukaryogenesis was driven by well-known ecological principles, and only limited by the lack of mutations or external factors (e.g. high-enough oxygen concentration). I find the second perspective in this particular case more revealing.

Besides, mitochondria-early scenarios have very serious problems that have not yet been solved. How did symbiosis happen into a cell with a rigid cell wall? How did the origin of mitochondria trigger everything in eukaryogenesis? To date no realistic scenario exists that could explain why and how mitochondrial symbiosis led to the evolution of a secretory and endocytic membrane system, let alone phagotrophy. One would necessarily have to come back to scenarios such as the one here to explain how phagocytosis originated, because phagotrophy is what it is, from any perspective: the eating of other cells. So the selective pressure involved had to be the same: it was advantageous to eat. But then again: why only a cell with a mitochondrium could have evolved that capacity? I am not at all convinced about the necessity to have mitochondria in order to start to evolve a eukaryote. This view of looking at the problem is a reference to an extreme contingency: nothing could have happened until the uptake of the mitochondrium that then solved (almost) everything.

The section on "phylogenetic contexts", while including a disclaimer that this is not the central theme of the paper, reads too rudimentary and too "objective". I find it very strange that the scenario where the engulfing host is an archaeon (or a representative of a stem archaeal-eukaryotic lineage) is presented on exactly the same footing with two other scenarios that are, simply, unsupported. I am not trying to push any kind of agenda, I just believe that this is what the data point to.