This paper presents a simple and straightforward hypothesis regarding the function of the bacterial PrfH proteins, a homolog of class 1 release factors. It is proposed that PrfH is RF0, a novel release factor with a distinct specificity. Of course, it is hard to disagree with this prediction – given the high level of similarity between PrfH and experimentally characterized release factors. I may note that, in the COG database that is used in this paper, and in other databases, PrfH proteins are annotated as putative release factors, so realistically, the novelty of the hypothesis is not so dramatic. Of course, a detailed discussion of potential functions of these uncharacterized proteins is useful. Herein, however, lie some problems with the current version. Again, given the rather obvious nature of the main idea, the value of the paper is expected to be in detailed analysis, and this seems to be somewhat underdeveloped. Specifically, I see three rather substantial issues:

1. Unfortunately, the manuscript includes no prediction of the signal recognized by RFH. This is understandable as there is, apparently, not enough data for making such a prediction. This being the case, however, I feel that the title of the paper is somewhat misleading because "...atypical mRNA signals, other than normal stop codons" seems to imply a specific prediction (the discussion of some possibilities at the end of the paper is really vague). For that matter, I am not convinced that this aspect of the hypothesis holds once the experiments are done: it is quite a possibility that RF0 does recognize one or more of the standard stop codons but under some specific conditions.

2. A phylogenetic tree for Class 1 release factors is presented but potential evolutionary scenarios for RF0 are not discussed. Why is this gene found in only ~10% of the sequenced bacterial genomes? Is it a result of a relatively recent duplication? What was the contribution of horizontal gene transfer to the evolution of this gene and what was the role of lineage-specific gene loss (the importance of the latter is implied by the fact that many bacteria seems to have prfH pseudogenes)? I believe all of this deserves explicit and reasonably detailed discussion. Further, it is strange that the tree is mentioned (not really discussed) in the beginning of the section on possible tests of the hypothesis. Does it have anything to do with those tests?

3. I am surprised that the authors do not make a bigger deal of (and, essentially, draw no conclusions from) the juxtaposition of the prfH gene with rtcB and their (reasonably) proposed translational coupling. It is true that the function of RtcB has not been characterized experimentally but it is not an utter mystery. Indeed, the adjacency of the rtcB gene to RNA cyclase in a great number of genomes strongly suggest that RtcB is an enzyme of tRNA and/or rRNA processing as briefly discussed in Koonin et al. Genome Biol. 2004;5(2):R7 (see Table 1 in that paper). The probable coexpression of prfH with these genes is quite intriguing and might hold the key to the actual function of RF0. I am sure this is worth some serious discussion in this paper.