This paper offers a fresh and interesting view of the epistemology of phylogenetic analysis. The authors start by explaining that traditional phylogenetic analysis is verificationist in its epistemological foundations (inevitably, this brings to mind Moliere's Monsieur Jourdain who discovered, to his great delight, that all his life he spoke prose... but nevertheless, this is an important clarification on the nature of the methodology that is applied non-critically all too often) and develop the alternative, falsificationist (Popperian) paradigm. They then describe crude (by self-admission) software they developed to falsify (prove impossible) phylogenetic affinities and present some examples of phylogenetic inferences made within this new framework.

The gist of the paper is, obviously, philosophical, and I will make some comments in the same spirit, i.e., without getting into details of the actual method and examples.

It seems to me that the authors under-appreciate (or at least do not present explicitly enough) the complementarity/conceptual equivalence of the verificationist and falsificationist approaches.

Indeed, when a phylogeneticist embraces the falsificationist credo, she can (at least, in principle) refute all possible tree topologies, except for one, and thus, effectively, verify the only remaining topology. This is becoming obvious in the case of 4-species tree: to verify one topology, all it takes is to falsify the remaining two topologies. Of course, in practice testing all topologies very quickly becomes prohibitively expensive with the growth of the number of nodes. However, refuting all positions of a given branch except one is still possible. In this respect, I think it is desirable to discuss some existing phylogenetic tests, such as Adachi-Hasegawa and Shimodaira-Hasegawa: what is their epistemological status?

The author seems be getting into a bit of a philosophical muddle by tacitly equating verificationism and the principle of complete evidence. To the best of my understanding, these are connected but not inseparable. The more practical side of the same issue is the emphasis that is being made in the manuscript on the sequence concatenation methods in connection with verificationism. Perhaps, concatenation is, indeed, relevant when it comes to complete evidence. Verificationism, however, seems to be a much more general principle that permeates all modern phylogenetics (although see above) and, as far as I understand, fully applies to single-gene phylogenies. I think it would be useful to be a little clearer on this point.

The above points are philosophical quibbles whose aim, in part, is to show that the reviewer understands the epistemological issues addressed in this paper (I do not know how well it works). Here, however, I come to the only problem that, to me, to some extent undercuts the value of this otherwise very interesting and promising paper. While the entire work is about falsificationism and its merits, the authors make a very strange, almost paradoxical somersault when it comes to conclusions and present, mostly, claims on putative new phylogenetic affinities that look suspiciously verificationist. It does not help that, when one looks into specifics, each of these connections looks dubious (granted, the authors are careful in pointing out that these are very preliminary indications). In my opinion, it would be much more appropriate to make conclusions on the falsification of some affinities that have been previously considered valid on the basis of verificationist phylogenetics or other evidence. Only then, as an addendum, some potentially interesting affinities that could not be falsified might be mentioned.