A Novel Phototaxis Receptor Hidden in the Cyanobacterial Genome

Many microorganisms, plants and animals control their
movements in response to light. The simplest motility
response to light, bacterial phototaxis, was described more
than a century ago (Engelmann, 1883). Although bacterial
taxis is now the best-understood simple sensory system,
no phototaxis receptors in bacteria have been described
yet. More complex organisms are better studied in this
respect: phototaxis in unicellular algae (Foster, 1984; Ebnet
et al., 1999) and fungi (Saranak and Foster, 1997), as well
as in Archaea (Spudich, 1998) was shown to be dependent
on rhodopsin-like receptors.
Complete genome sequencing of the photosynthetic
cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC6803 (Kaneko et
al., 1996) should have resulted in the identification of a
phototaxis receptor. However, the bioinformatics methods
used for the genome annotation in 1996 were not sensitive
enough. An increased power of new algorithms for
genomics, especially the introduction of the PSI-BLAST
program (Altschul et al., 1997), provided new opportunities
for discoveries in completely sequenced genomes.
Therefore, I have revisited the Synechocystis genome in
order to identify the first bacterial phototaxis receptor.
BLAST searches against the Synechocystis genome
database (available at www.kazusa.or.jp/cyano/cyano.html)
by using a highly conserved signaling domain of bacterial
chemotaxis receptors (Le Moual and Koshland, 1996) as
queries have identified three genes coding for taxis
receptors: sll0041, sll1294 and slr1044. Further in silico
domain analysis including PSI-BLAST searches (Altschul
et al., 1997) and multiple alignments revealed that the gene
sll0041, which has been annotated as coding for a methylaccepted chemotaxis protein I or a serine chemotaxis
receptor (Kaneko et al., 1996), coded in fact for a phototaxis
receptor. In its C-terminal region, the sll0041 protein
contains a conserved signaling module typical of bacterial
taxis receptors (Figure 1). This sequence region is
homologous to the signaling module from the serine
chemoreceptor and other methyl-accepting chemotaxis
proteins from Escherichia coli that caused the erroneous
gene annotation in 1996. I have identified two GAF domains
and two HAMP domains in the N-terminal region of the
sll0041 protein (Figure 1). The GAF domains are sensor
modules in various phototransducing proteins in both
eukaryotes and prokaryotes (Aravind and Ponting, 1997).
The best known examples of GAF-domain-containing
photoreceptors are plant phytochromes (Reed, 1999) and
ethylene response sensors (Chang and Shockey, 1999)
and mammalian rod photoreceptor phosphodiesterases
(Soderling and Beavo, 2000). HAMP domain is found in
various signal transduction proteins. Aravind and Ponting
have recently suggested that the HAMP domain is not just
a linker between a transmembrane region and a signaling
domain, as it was previously thought, but it is an important
signaling domain itself (Aravind and Ponting, 1999). The
presence of the second HAMP domain between the GAF2
domain and the signaling module in the cyanobacterial
photoreceptor (Figure 1) is in a good agreement with their
idea. All sensory and signaling domains of the sll0041
protein are predicted to be located in the cytoplasm (Figure
1).
The GAF1 domain of sll0041 has a conserved histidine
(His311), the known tetrapyrolle chromophore binding site
in eubacterial photoreceptors (Davis et al., 1999), whereas
the GAF2 domain has a conserved cysteine residue
(Cys483), the known tetrapyrolle chromophore binding site
in plant phytochromes (Reed, 1999) (Figure 2). Thus, both
GAF domains of sll0041 may contain the chromophore.
Tetrapyrolle chromophores in plant and bacterial
photoreceptors mediate responses to red/far red light.
Recent finding that Synechocystis has a positive phototactic
response to red/far red light (Choi et al., 1999) suggests
the presence of a tetrapyrolle-containing sensor and
supports our in silico evidence that the sll0041 protein is
indeed a phototaxis receptor. A GAF-domain-containing
sensor module has been recently reported in lightresponsive histidine kinases from Rhodocista centenaria
(Jiang et al., 1999), Deinococcus radiodurans and
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Davis et al., 1999) indicating
that GAF photosensors are present in distantly related
bacteria. The GAF-domain-containing phototaxis receptor
from cyanobacteria is a member of the emerging subclass
of taxis receptors that sense stimuli intracellularly. This
involves the PAS-domain-containing Aer protein from E.
coli (Bibikov et al., 1997; Rebbapragada et al., 1997) and
myoglobin-like oxygen sensors from Halobacterium
salinarum and Bacillus subtilis (Hou et al, 2000).
