The Superfamily of Chemotaxis Transducers: From Physiology to Genomics and Back 

ABSTRACT
Chemotaxis transducers are specialized receptors that microorganisms
use in order to sense the environment in directing their motility to
favorable niches. The Escherichia coli transducers are models for
studying the sensory and signaling events at the molecular level.
Extensive studies in other organisms and the arrival of genomics has
resulted in the accumulation of sequences of many transducer genes,
but they are not fully understood. In silico analysis provides some
assistance in classification of various transducers from different
species and in predicting their function. All transducers contain two
structural modules: a conserved C-terminal multidomain module,
which is a signature element of the transducer superfamily, and a
variable N-terminal module, which is responsible for the diversity
within the superfamily. These structural modules have two distinct
functions: the conserved C-terminal module is involved in signaling
and adaptation, and the N-terminal module is involved in sensing
various stimuli. Both C-terminal and N-terminal modules appear to be
mobile genetic elements and subjects of duplication and lateral
transfer. Although chemotaxis transducers are found exclusively in
prokaryotic organisms that have some type of motility (flagellar,
gliding or pili-based), several types of domains that are found in their
N-terminal modules are also present in signal transduction proteins
from eukaryotes, including humans. This indicates that basic principles
of sensory transduction are conserved throughout the phylogenetic tree
and that the chemotaxis transducer superfamily is a valuable source of
novel sensory elements yet to be discovered. 

1. INTRODUCTION
All living organisms monitor their environment in order to adapt better to constant changes in physical parameters, such as light, temperature, availability of nutrients, etc. Microorganisms employ two major strategies for such adaptation: regulation of gene expression and active motility. Both processes are
governed by so called two-component regulatory systems consisting of sensor
histidine kinases and cognate response regulators (for a recent review, see
Hoch, 2000). The major difference between the two adaptive strategies at the
molecular level is that in regulating active motility (usually referred to as
chemotaxis) the response regulator lacks the DNA-binding domain and binds
to flagellar motors, and the histidine kinase lacks a sensor module and utilizes
upstream sensor proteins. These are known as chemoreceptors or chemotaxis
transducers.
During more than three decades of genetic and biochemical investigations,
four chemotaxis transducers from Escherichia coli were identified and extensively studied (reviewed by Stock and Surette, 1996). The fifth transducer
(Bibikov et al., 1997; Rebbapragada et al., 1997) has been identified only
with the arrival of the genomic era, when the corresponding gene was
sequenced and deposited to the public database during the E. coli genome
sequencing project (Blattner et al., 1997). The whole genome sequencing of
twelve microbial species, where chemotaxis genes are present, resulted in
accumulation of more than 100 sequences of chemotaxis transducers in the
non-redundant protein database (June 2000). The ongoing microbial
sequence projects, including large-scale gapped genome sequencing (Selkov
et al., 2000), may result in more than 100 chemotactic species being
sequenced by the time this review is published. This may bring the total
number of chemotaxis transducer sequences in public and private databases
to more than 1000.
In this review, I will try to put together information that may assist
researchers in their 'wet bench' work with signal transducers in the postgenomic era. I include only selected references taken from the genomics point
of view. No attempts have been made to produce a comprehensive review on
the structure and function of microbial chemotaxis transducers. For more
detailed structural and functional information, I refer the reader to reviews by
Hazelbauer et al. (1990), Kim (1994), Stock and Surette (1996), Levit et al.
(1998), Mowbray and Sandgren (1998), Mowbray (1999) and Stock and Levit
(2000). General views on bacterial motility and chemotaxis can be found in
reviews by Manson (1992), Parkinson (1993), Blair (1995), Eisenbach (1996),
Stock and Surette (1996), Falke et al. (1997), Armitage (1997a,b, 1999),
Macnab (1999), Taylor et al. (1999). I will also try to show the advantage of in
silico analysis as a useful tool for microbial physiologists. As for any tool, it
has its limits, whereas microbial physiology, as a field of knowledge, does not
have any. 

2. HISTORY AND TERMINOLOGY
Studies on bacterial locomotion and mechanisms of its control were initiated
in the last century. I refer the reader to the excellent review on the history of
investigations into bacterial chemotaxis by Berg (1975) and, for more recent
interpretations of some important historical events, to the series of reviews by
Armitage (1997a,b, 1999).
The reader outside the field of bacterial signal transduction may be easily
confused by the variety of terms and names in the literature with respect to bacterial and archaeal chemotaxis transducers. The terms 'chemoreceptors',
'methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins (MCPs)', 'chemotaxis transducers',
'transducer-like proteins (TLPs)' describe essentially the same functional superfamily of signal transduction proteins. Similarly, genes encoding these proteins
are usually annotated by sequencing terms as McpA (B, C, D, etc.), Mcpl (2,
3, 4, etc.), TIpA (B, C, D, etc.). More specific names, such as Tsr (taxis to serine
and repellents (Springer et al., 1977)), Aer (aerotaxis and energy responses
(Bibikov et al., 1997; Rebbapragada et al., 1997)), HemAT (heine-based aerotaxis transducer (Hou et al., 2000)) or Ctp (chemotaxis transducer for phosphate
(Wu et al., 2000)) are usually given by wet bench scientists. Real confusion in
naming is observed when two or more laboratories identify and name differently the same transducer. For example, chemotaxis transducers from
Halobacterium salinarum, HtH (Zhang et al., 1996a), HtrXI (Brooun et al.,
1997) and Car (Storch et al., 1999) stand for essentially the same protein.
Julius Adler pioneered the modern era in microbial signal transduction and
introduced the term 'receptors' to define sensor proteins that govern the
chemotactic response (see Table 1 for some important historic developments in
transducer research and appropriate references). Then, the terms 'primary
receptors' and 'transducers' appeared in order to distinguish between sugarbinding proteins and methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins. Sugar-binding
proteins are involved in both chemotaxis and transport and do not have the specific features of a chemotaxis transducer (Mowbray and Sandgren, 1998;
Mowbray, 1999; ). The term 'chemotactic signal transducer' was introduced to
define a common component, the Trg protein of E. coli, which interacts
directly with two independent receptor proteins and transmits information to
the central chemotactic machinery (Harayama et al., 1979; Kondoh et al.,
1979). The word 'chemoreceptor' often used in the current literature essentially
means 'chemotaxis transducer', not 'primary receptor'.
The Tsr protein of E. coli was the first chemotaxis transducer identified as
a methyl-accepting chemotaxis protein (Kort et al., 1975). The term 'MCP'
was successfully launched by Adler and then used by many researchers studying chemotaxis transducers. Putative chemotaxis transducers that have been
identified in Bacillus subtilis, but for which no chemotaxis function and 
methylation/demethylation were found, have been termed 'TLPs' (transducerlike proteins) (Hanlon and Ordal, 1994). Thus, the use of 'MCP' should
probably be limited to cases where methylation/demethylation of the transducers has been experimentally proven.
The terms 'chemotaxis transducers' and 'chemoreceptors' are used equally
often in the modem literature, although 'transducer' defines the superfamily in a
more precise way. A common function for the members of the superfamily is
transduction of a signal to the CheA/CheY two-component system, and their
common structural feature is a conserved cytoplasmic module in the C-terminus.
3. BRIEF OVERVIEW OF SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION IN
CHEMOTAXIS
Chemotaxis is a rather generic term describing active movement of microorganisms in response to various chemical and physical stimuli. The ability to
actively search for conditions that promote growth and development and to
avoid harmful environments is obviously important for survival. Chemotaxis
may play an important role in relationships (including pathogenic and symbiotic) of microorganisms between themselves and with other organisms.
In isotropic environments, bacterial cells move in a three-dimensional
random walk (Berg and Brown, 1972) resulting from alternating the direction
of flagellar rotation. Rotation of flagella in one direction propels the cell forward, whereas the change in the direction of rotation (or a very brief stop in
rotation) allows re-orientation. Different species have different types of flagellation, but the basic principle of swimming/re-orientation seems to be the
same. Microorganisms have a temporal sensing mechanism, where they compare the intensity of a stimulus (for example, concentration of a chemical)
during the past second with the previous few seconds (Block et al., 1982).
The first step in recognition of a stimulus is its interaction with the receptor.
As mentioned above, there are some primary receptors that interact with transducers, or a transducer itself performs the function of a receptor by interacting
with the stimulus directly. Transducers have two distinct modules, one for
sensing and another for signaling. In most transducers, the sensing module is
located in the periplasm, where it detects concentration of various small molecules, such as sugars and amino acids. The signaling module is always located
in the cytoplasm, where it communicates with the flagellar motor via the
CheA/CheY two-component system (Fig. 1). CheA is a histidine kinase that
autophosphorylates by using ATP and then transfers the phosphate to the CheY
response regulator (reviewed by Bourret et al., 1991; Armitage, 1999).
Phosphorylated CheY binds to the switch proteins in the flagellar motor, which
causes a change in the direction of flagellar rotation (reviewed by Eisenbach, 
1996, and Silversmith and Bourret, 1999). Chemotaxis transducers form stable
ternary complexes with CheA and the docking protein CheW (Gegner et al.,
1992) and modulate the kinase autophosphorylation in response to interaction
with a stimulus or to changes in their methylation state. Changes in the methylation of transducers promote sensory adaptation (Springer et al., 1979).
Covalent modification, methylation and demethylation of chemotaxis transducers is due to the activity of specific enzymes, the CheR methyltransferase
(Springer and Koshland, 1977) and the CheB methylesterase (Stock and
Koshland, 1978). CheR activity is unregulated, whereas CheB has a conserved
response regulator domain and, like CheY, is phosphorylated by CheA.
Although chemotaxis transducers are predominantly dimeric, in the complex
with CheA and CheW, structures of much higher order have been observed.
Recent results indicate that transmembrane signaling occurs within transducer
clusters rather than through isolated dimers (Liu et al., 1997; Levit et al., 1998).
The clustering of transducers appears to be a mechanism for increasing the sensitivity of the chemotactic response (Bray, 1998; Bray et al., 1998; Levit et al., 
1999). Recent study by Li and Weis (2000) provided evidence that covalent modification of the transducers regulates ligand binding to their sensing domains. This
regulation is observed only in the complexes of transducers with CheA/CheW.
These results, taken together with the finding that transducers exist in clusters,
suggest that signaling in chemotaxis occurs via transducer arrays that are dynamic
with respect to assembly and disassembly (Li and Weis, 2000).
4. CLASSICAL TRANSDUCERS (Escherichia coli and
Salmonella) IN THE PREGENOMIC ERA
4.1. Specificity
Five chemotaxis transducers are found in E. coli K-12, whose genome is completely sequenced: Tar, Tsr (Springer et al., 1977), Trg (Kondoh et al., 1979;
Hazelbauer et al., 1981), Tap (Manson et al., 1986) and Aer (Bibikov et al.,
1997; Rebbapragada et al., 1997). Six transducers have been found so far in its
close relative Salmonella enterica ser. typhimurium (formerly, S.
typhimurium), whose genome sequencing was still in progress at the time this
review was completed: Tar, Tsr, Trg and Aer (which are E. coli homologs), Tip
(Russo and Koshland, 1986) and Tcp (Yamamoto and Imae, 1993).
Chemotaxis transducers in E. coli detect very different stimuli (for an overview
and complete list of references, see Stock and Surette, 1996; Taylor et al., 1999).
The Tar protein responds to the attractants aspartate, glutamate (directly) and
maltose (via the maltose-binding protein), and divalent cations as repellents. The
Tsr transducer responds to the attractants serine, alanine, glycine, aminoisobutyrate, pH (directly), oxygen and protonmotive force (indirectly). Trg responds to
ribose (via ribose-binding protein), galactose and glucose (via the galactose-binding protein). Tap is the sensor of dipeptides (via dipeptide-binding proteins) and
Aer is the sensor of redox potential of the electron transport system. The Tcp
transducer of Salmonella is the sensor of the attractant citrate and repellent phenol.
4.2. Domain Organization
The domain organization and membrane topology of all transducers except for
Aer is the same and they are closely related in sequence (see Stock and Surette,
1996, and Falke et al., 1997, for an overview). The first comparative analysis of
the amino acid sequences of the chemotaxis transducers of E. coli and
Salmonella showed that the C-terminal cytoplasmic regions of these proteins are
much more conserved than the N-terminal periplasmic regions. The conservation
was especially strong in the central part of the C-terminal region called highly
conserved domain (HCD) and, to a lesser extent, in the two segments flanking
HCD that contained methylation sites (Krikos et al., 1983; Dahl et al., 1989).
Each chemotaxis transducer consists of a short N-terminal sequence within the
cytoplasm, the TM1 transmembrane region, a large periplasmic ligand-binding
(sensing) domain, the TM2 region, a linker, a methylated domain MD1, a highly
conserved (signaling) domain (HCD), MD2 and a short variable C-terminal
segment (Fig. 2). Chemotaxis transducers with this domain organization and
membrane topology are referred to as 'classical' throughout this review. The Aer
protein lacks a periplasmic ligand-binding domain and has a cytoplasmic sensing domain followed by an extended (40 residues) TM region, a linker, MD 1,
HCD and MD2 (Bibikov et al., 1997; Rebbapragada et al., 1997). 
4.2.1. The Periplasmic Ligand-binding Domain
Sequence variation in the N-terminal sensing domain of the transducers from
enteric bacteria was noticed a long time ago (Krikos et al., 1983). Until
now, the common view was that there is little sequence similarity between
the sensing modules of the four chemotaxis transducers of E. coli (Tar, Tsr,
Trg and Tap), which reflects the different stimuli they recognize. However, it
was suggested that the basic structure of the periplasmic domain in classical
chemotaxis transducers from E. coli and S. typhimurium should be similar
(Mowbray and Sandgren, 1998). The three-dimensional structure of the
periplasmic ligand-binding domain of the Tar protein has been solved
(Milburn et al., 1991; Bowie et al., 1995; Yeh et al., 1996) and shown to be
an antiparallel four-helix bundle. Tar exists in the membrane as a stable
homodimer (Milligan and Koshland, 1988), and only one binding site per
dimer has been detected for the attractant aspartate (Biemann and Koshland,
1994). The E. coli Tar protein (but not the one from Salmonella) also binds
a liganded maltose-binding protein (Kossman et al., 1988). Maltose-binding
protein interacts with both subunits of the dimer, binding at one of the two
possible sites, which is different from the aspartate-binding site (Gardina et
al., 1997).
The mechanisms of serine binding to the Tsr transducer (Lin et al., 1994)
and citrate binding to the Tcp transducer (Iwama et al., 2000) were suggested
to be similar to that of aspartate binding to Tar.
4.2.2. Transmembrane Regions
Transmembrane (TM) regions in the chemotaxis transducers of E. coli and
Salmonella were the subjects of extensive biochemical studies in order to discover the mechanism of the transmembrane signaling (Danielson et al., 1994;
Chervitz and Falke, 1995). Various models for transmembrane signaling have
been proposed (Kim, 1994; Chervitz and Falke, 1996; Ottemann et al., 1999),
and the sequence specificity of the TM regions was found to be important
(Jeffery and Koshland, 1999). However, even without transmembrane regions,
the classical-type chemotaxis transducer appeared to be at least partially functional (Ottemann and Koshland, 1997).
4.2.3. Linker
The cytoplasmic portion of the chemotaxis transducers between the TM2 and
MD1 regions (212-263, Tar) was designated as a 'linker' in order to avoid
undue functional connotations at that time (Ames and Parkinson, 1988). It was 
known, however, that the linker might play an important role in the signaling
process (Oosawa and Simon, 1986).
Weak sequence similarity between the linkers that follow the second transmembrane region in chemotaxis transducers Tar and Tsr and in the histidine
kinase EnvZ was noticed early (Matsuyama et al., 1986). Later, a common
transmembrane signaling mechanism for chemotaxis transducers and histidine kinases was proposed based on experiments with chimeric receptors
(Utsumi et al., 1989; Baumgartner et al., 1994). Parkinson and Kofoid (1992)
proposed that the linker might play a role in propagating conformational
changes between the sensing and the signaling domains during transmembrane signaling in bacteria. As in chemotaxis transducers, mutations in the
linker region of various histidine kinases affected signal transduction (reviewed
by Williams and Stewart, 1999). Biochemical and computerized sequence
analyses revealed that the linker region contains two amphiphilic o~-helices
(Butler and Falke, 1998); these are identified as coiled coil-like motifs by
newly available computer algorithms (Singh et al., 1998). Previously, coiled
coils were predicted only for methylation helices of the C-terminal domain
(Lupas et al., 1991; Stock et al., 1991). More recently, the linker region was
convincingly implicated in transmembrane signal transduction in the E. coli
chemotaxis transducers (Ames and Parkinson, 1988; Gardina and Manson,
1996; Tatsuno et al., 1996; Butler and Falke, 1998; Bibikov et al., 2000).
4.2.4. Methylation Domains
The C-terminal module contains two regions where methylation has been
shown to occur. They were initially termed K1 and R1 regions because of the
lysine and arginine tryptic fragments used in methylation experiments (Kehry
and Dahlquist, 1982). In the current literature, these regions are usually
referred to as methylation domains (or helices), MD1 and MD2 (Stock and
Surette, 1996; Surette and Stock, 1996; Danielson et al., 1997). The methylation domains were predicted to form tx-helical coiled coil structures (Lupas et
al., 1991; Stock et al., 1991). They contain several specific glutamine and
glutamate residues that are subject to deamidation and reversible methylation
(Kehry and Dahlquist, 1982; Terwilliger and Koshland, 1984). In Tar, Tsr and
Trg transducers, MD1 contains three to four sites of glutamate modification
and MD2 contains one or two sites (reviewed by Stock and Surette, 1996).
Signaling activity of the transducers is regulated by the level of methylation/amidation (Springer et al., 1979; Ninfa et al., 1991; Borkovich et al.,
1992).
Comparative sequence analysis predicted (Le Moual and Koshland, 1996),
and the structural studies demonstrated (Kim et al., 1999), a distinct ct-helical
structure for these regions (Figs 3 and 4). Methylation domains (MD) flank the 
signaling domain, and it is suggested that the MD1 of the transducer monomers
come together in a coiled coil to position properly the signaling domain and
their associated CheW protein for formation of a complex with CheA (Surette
and Stock, 1996). Both MD1 and MD2 in E. coli and Salmonella transducers
contain a 14-amino acid residue deletion in comparison to those from Archaea
and B. subtilis, which corresponds to two seven-residue repeats found throughout the C-terminal module (Le Moual and Koshland, 1996). 
4.2.5. Signaling Domain
The region between MD 1 and MD2 is usually termed the signaling domain or
the highly conserved domain (HCD) (Fig. 3), depending on whether the function or the structure is considered (Le Moual and Koshland, 1996; Stock and
Surette, 1996). Genetic (Liu and Parkinson, 1991) and biochemical (Surette 
and Stock, 1996) studies provided evidence that the signaling domain is a site
of interaction with the CheW protein, i.e. a link between the transducer and the
two-component chemotaxis system. Important proof that the proposed signaling portion of the chemotaxis transducers comprises a distinct domain came
from the observation that it can fold independently (Surette and Stock, 1996).
The early sequence analysis revealed a very high degree of similarity in this
region between the transducers from enteric bacteria (Krikos et al., 1983;
Dahl et al., 1989). Analysis that involved transducers from other species
strengthened this point and allowed the authors to conclude that the HCD-containing proteins constitute a superfamily (Le Moual and Koshland, 1996). This
finding had a major impact on the development of this field of study in the
postgenomic era.
4.2.6. Variable C-terminal Segment
The C-terminal segment following MD2 in the chemotaxis transducer of E.
coli is variable. At the very end of the C-terminus, three transducers, Tar, Tsr
and Tcp, have a pentapeptide N-W-E-T/S-F, which has been identified as a site
for CheR methyltransferase binding (Wu et al., 1996; Djordjevic and Stock,
1998). Altering the site severely affects adaptation, which can be corrected by
overproduction of CheR (Okumura et al., 1998). Furthermore, overproduction
of CheR also enhanced adaptive methylation of wild-type Trg, which does not
contain the pentapeptide, in the absence of any other chemoreceptor. Trg with
an engineered pentapeptide had significantly enhanced methylation activity
(Feng et al., 1999). This suggests that the pentapeptide facilitates effective
adaptation and methylation by recruiting the methyltransferase. Transducers
that lack the pentapeptide are present in lower (10-fold) amounts in the cell and
are termed low-abundance transducers (Feng et al., 1997; Barnakov et al.,
1998). The difference in the abundance of the transducers may be due to the
level of methyl-accepting activity conferred by the methyltransferase-docking
site (Feng et al., 1999). In a later study, it was shown that the methylesterase
CheB uses the same pentapeptide as a docking site (Barnakov et al., 1999).
Hydrophobic residues W and F of the pentapeptide were found to be most
important for the interaction with CheR, and the presence of the pentapeptide
in transducers from other species has been noticed (Shiomi et al., 2000).
5. TRANSDUCERS IN OTHER BACTERIA
Although chemotaxis transducers in other microbial species have not been
studied as extensively as those in E. coli and Salmonella, they are the 
subjects of many recent investigations. These studies provide valuable information on the diversity of signal transduction in microorganisms, as well as
on the mechanisms of adaptation of microorganisms to their, environments,
both subjects being at the forefront of microbial physiology, ecology and
evolution.
An elegant study by Hazelbauer's group demonstrated that chemotaxis
transducers are widespread in the microbial world (Morgan et al., 1993). The
antibody raised against the Trg transducer of E. coli revealed the presence of
antigenically related proteins in over 20 species from different phylogenetic
groups and allowed the authors to predict that chemotaxis transducers would
be found in all flagellated microbial species. Time has proved the authors
right; we now know that even microorganisms that have other than flagellar
types of motility possess chemotaxis transducers belonging to the same superfamily.
5.1. Bacillus subtilis
Six chemotaxis transducers in B. subtilis, namely McpA, McpB, TlpA, TlpB,
McpC and TlpC, have been identified experimentally by using DNA probes to
the HCD of E. coli (Hanlon and Ordal, 1994; Hanlon et al., 1994; MUller et al.,
1997). All of them have a classical domain organization and membrane topology. McpB mediates taxis to asparagine, aspartate, glutamate, glutamine and
histidine (Hanlon and Ordal, 1994), McpC mediates taxis to all other amino
acids (Mtiller et al., 1997) and some carbohydrates (Garrity et al., 1998), and
McpA mediates taxis to glucose (Hanlon and Ordal, 1994). Signals recognized
by TlpA and TIpB are unknown and mutations in these genes did not produce
obvious defects in chemotaxis (Hanlon and Ordal, 1994). The current hypothesis is that these proteins are involved in cell-cell communication, similar to the
role of transducers in the development of Myxococcus xanthus (see below).
Although both CheR-dependent methylation and CheB-dependent demethylation (Goldman and Ordal, 1984) of transducers takes place in B. subtilis, there
is a deviation from the known E. coli paradigm. Both attractants and repellents
cause net demethylation of the McpB transducer, and each demethylation event
is followed by re-methylation (Kirby et al., 1999). Methylation occurs sequentially for three different sites on McpB, and one of these sites must be
methylated to preset the transducer for a response to negative stimuli (Zimmer
et al., 2000).
Most recently, a homolog of the novel halobacterial heme-containing transducer has been found in B. subtilis (Hou et al., 2000). As in halobacteria (see
section 5.2), the transducer, termed HemAT, is a soluble cytoplasmic protein
that mediates the chemotactic response to oxygen. 
5.2. Halobacterium salinarum
Halobacterium salinarum, a member of the Archaea, utilizes a large number
of chemotaxis transducers. An experimental approach, where transducers
were revealed by hybridization with a DNA probe (Rudolph et al., 1996) or
MAP antibody (Zhang et al., 1996a) to the highly conserved signaling
domain of the halobacterial transducer, HtrI, was successful in identifying up
to 13 chemotaxis transducers in H. salinarum. The relatedness of halobacterial transducers to those of E. coli was demonstrated by immunological
cross-reaction (Alam and Hazelbauer, 1991). The systematic physiological
and biochemical analysis of halobacterial transducers yielded informative
results. Two proteins, HtrI and HtrII are utilized for transducing a phototaxis
signal from sensory rhodopsins, SRI and SRII, respectively (Yao and
Spudich, 1992; Krah et al., 1994; Zhang et al., 1996b). In addition, the HtrII
transducer was found to mediate chemotaxis to serine (Hou et al., 1998),
with both light and chemical stimuli producing changes in the methylation
pattern. The membrane-bound BasT transducer, which has an extensive
periplasmic sensing domain, has been shown to govern chemotaxis to five
amino acids: leucine, isoleucine, valine, methionine and cysteine (Kokoeva
and Oesterhelt, 2000). Analyses of one of the soluble transducers, termed
HtrXI (Brooun et al., 1997) or Car (Storch et al., 1999) yielded almost contradictory results. Alam's group (Brooun et al., 1997), reported that the
transducer is involved in taxis toward aspartate, glutamate and histidine,
whereas Oesterhelt's group (Storch et al., 1999) later described the transducer as a specific sensor for arginine.
Two transducers in H. salinarum were found to govern the aerotactic
response. First, the HtrVIII transducer was implicated in aerotaxis. This protein
was reported to have an N-terminal domain similar to subunit I core structures
of the eukaryotic cytochrome c oxidase (Brooun et al., 1998). A later detailed
biochemical investigation resulted in the identification of a novel aerotaxis
transducer in H. salinarum, the HemAT protein (Hou et al., 2000). A homologous protein was also identified in B. subtilis. In its N-terminal sensing
module, HemAT contains a sequence resembling the entire-length myoglobin
from eukaryotes, which is different from a heme-binding motif found in the
DcrA redox-responsive transducer from Desulfovibrio vulgaris (see section
5.3). The HemAT represents a new class of heme-based oxygen sensors in
microorganisms.
5.3. Desulfovibrio vulgaris
An unusual methyl-accepting protein was found in an anaerobic bacterium D.
vulgaris. In its N-terminal sensor region, the transducer contained a c-type
heme (Fu et al., 1994). Methylation of DcrA decreased upon addition of
oxygen and increased upon subsequent addition of dithionite, indicating that
DcrA may serve as a sensor of oxygen concentration and/or redox potential. In
addition to the N-terminal heme-binding domain, another redox-responsive
domain, PAS, has been identified in the DcrA protein sequence (Taylor and
Zhulin, 1999). The PAS domain in DcrA is located between the second transmembrane region and the C-terminal signaling module. Therefore, two
putative redox-sensing modules are present in DcrA. The aerotactic response
in D. vttlgaris was described (Johnson et al., 1997) and found to be present in
the dcrA mutant (R. Fu, G. Voordouw, M.S. Johnson, I.B. Zhulin and B.L.
Taylor, unpublished results). This, however, does not rule out the involvement
of the DcrA protein in aerotaxis. More than one transducer may be involved in
governing the aerotaxis response in D. vulgaris, as it is in E. coli
(Rebbapragada et al., 1997).
A family of genes coding for putative methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins
has been found in D. vulgaris by using a DNA probe to a highly conserved
domain (Deckers and Voordouw, 1996). One of these genes, dcrH, was completely sequenced and its deduced amino acid sequence was analyzed. Deckers
and Voordouw (1996) and Le Moual and Koshland (1996) reported an unusual
deviation of the DcrH C-terminal module from those in enteric bacteria. More
recently, a hemerythrin signature motif was identified in the very C-terminus
of the 1-)crH protein, and the biochemical analysis revealed the presence of an
oxo-bridged diiron(m) site very similar to that found in hemerythrin (Xiong et
al., 2000). Hemerythrin is an oxygen carder in invertebrates and had never
been found in any microorganism prior to that report. The uniqueness of the
DcrH transducer is also in the localization of this unusual domain: so far, this
is the only example of any domain found C-terminal to the signaling module.
As in many other species where transducer genes were found, chemotaxis in D.
vulgaris has never been studied.
5.4. Myxococcus xanthus
Two chemotaxis transducers have been identified in M. xanthus, a gliding
bacterium that undergoes a complex multicellular developmental program.
Both transducers are located within two putative chemotaxis operons, frz and
dif. No transmembrane regions were predicted for the FrzCD transducer, but it
was shown to be methylated in vivo upon changes in the environmental conditions (McCleary et al., 1990; McBride and Zusman, 1993). The DifA
transducer is involved in the social (S) motility of M. xanthus, and also has
non-classical membrane topology (Yang et al., 1998). More recently, four new
chemotaxis transducers have been found in M. xanthus by using a probe to the
highly conserved domain of FrzCD and DifA (J.R. Kirby, H.C. Vlamakis and 
D.R. Zusman, unpublished results). Stimuli recognized by chemotaxis
transducers in M. xanthus are unknown, although mutations in the transducer
genes produce unique developmental phenotypes.
5.5. Caulobacter crescentus
Caulobacter crescentus was the first t~-proteobacterium in which a chemotaxis
transducer was identified (Alley et al., 1991). The McpA protein was shown to
be specifically localized to the flagellated pole of the predivisional cell (Alley
et al., 1992). This was long before polar localization of chemotaxis transducers was demonstrated in other species and appeared to be a universal
phenomenon. Unlike in other microorganisms, the chemoreceptors in C.
crescentus are degraded during its life cycle, and proteolysis plays an important part in the asymmetric distribution of the polarly localized
chemoreceptors (Alley et al., 1993). Eighteen genes coding for chemotaxis
transducers have been identified during the Caulobacter genome-sequencing
project; 12 of them are predicted as membrane proteins, and the other six
appear to be soluble cytoplasmic proteins (I. Potocka and M.R.K. Alley, personal communication).
5.6. Rhodobacter sphaeroides
A membrane-bound chemotaxis transducer without any periplasmic domain
has been identified in R. sphaeroides (Ward et al., 1995). This protein, designated McpA, apparently responds to a wide array of stimuli, but only under
aerobic conditions; the mcpA mutant did show chemotaxis under anaerobic/
photosynthetic conditions (Ward et al., 1995). This raised a question on the
environmental regulation of chemotaxis transducers in this organism. In a
more recent study from Armitage's laboratory, two groups of chemotaxis
transducers have been identified: membrane-bound proteins localized at the
cell poles in clusters and also clustered cytoplasmic proteins (Harrison et al.,
1999). Environmental conditions dramatically alter both expression and localization of the transducers. As many as 12 genes coding for putative
chemotaxis transducers are found in R. sphaeroides (G. Wadhams and J.
Armitage, unpublished data). One of the transducers, McpG, which had a
classical membrane topology, was recently identified (Wadhams et al., 2000).
In contrast to McpA, the McpG protein was expressed under all growth conditions tested, but the stimuli that are recognized by the transducer are still
unknown. The polar localization of McpG depends on the chemotaxis proteins
encoded by the second chemotaxis operon in R. sphaeroides (Wadhams et al.,
2000), indicating that certain transducers may require a particular set of 
homologs of the chemotaxis proteins in this organism. The deletion analysis
of several other membrane-bound transducers did not produce any clear phenotype, but deletion of a gene coding for one of the cytoplasmic transducers
resulted in a complete loss of all chemotactic responses (J.P. Armitage, unpublished data).
Negative phototaxis to an increase in blue- and a decrease in infrared-light
intensity was shown to coincide with methanol release (receptor demethylation) in R. sphaeroides (Kort et al., 2000). Thus, in this organism, not only
chemotaxis, but also phototaxis, may be processed via methyl-accepting
chemotaxis proteins.
5.7. Sinorhizobium meliloti and Rhizobium leguminosarum
Several research groups have studied chemotaxis in rhizobia, since it is thought
to play an important role in the interaction of these root-nodule-forming nitrogen-fixing bacteria with their legume hosts. Armitage et al. (1988)
demonstrated protein methylation in Rhizobium leguminosarum upon stimulation with the attractant serine, which suggested the presence of
methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins in rhizobia. Open reading frames coding
for putative chemotaxis transducers were later found in the major chemotaxis
operon of Sinorhizobium meliloti, another agronomically important rhizobial
species (Greck et al., 1995), but their role has not been established. Later,
genes with significant similarity to chemotaxis transducers were reported in R.
leguminosarum (Brito et al., 1996) and in Rhizobium sp. NGR234 (Freiberg et
al., 1997). In both cases, the genes were located on one of the symbiotic plasmids. More recently, several genes encoding chemotaxis transducers in R.
leguminosarum have been identified (Yost et al., 1998). Inactivation of the
mcpB gene resulted in impairment of chemotaxis to a wide range of chemicals,
whereas no changes in chemotaxis were observed upon inactivation of three
other genes coding for putative chemotaxis transducers. The mcpB and mcpC
mutants were also impaired in the nodule formation, indicating that the chemotactic response via corresponding transducers may be important in the
plant-microbe interaction.
5.8. Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Pseudomonas putida
A classical type methyl-accepting chemotaxis protein, PctA has been described
in P. aeruginosa. The transducer responded to several amino acids, and methylation of the PctA protein in vivo was demonstrated (Kuroda et al., 1995). The
follow-up studies revealed another two chemotaxis transducer genes in the
pctA-flankJng region, pctB and pctC. Deletion of all three transducers resulted
in a complete loss of chemotaxis to all 20 amino acids (Taguchi et al., 1997).
Deletion analysis of the individual transducer genes revealed that PctA is the
major sensor of amino acids (up to 18), whereas PctB and PctC respond to
seven and two amino acids, respectively. More recently, another two transducers have been identified and their function established by Ohtake's group
(Wu et al., 2000); the CtpH and CtpL transducers were shown to govern
chemotactic responses of P. aeruginosa to inorganic phosphate. Interestingly,
the sensing of phosphate by CtpL, but not CtpH, appears to be posttranscriptionally controlled by the PhoU protein.
The NahY protein of P. putida (Grimm and Harwood, 1999) is a typical
chemotaxis receptor with a membrane topology similar to those of E. coli. It
was found to govern chemotaxis of P. putida to naphthalene. Interestingly,
the nahY gene is co-transcribed with the meta cleavage pathway genes on the
catabolic plasmid for naphthalene degradation. In a recent study, the
homolog of the E. coli Aer sensor was identified in P. putida and its role in
governing the aerotactic response was established (Nichols and Harwood,
2000).
5.9. Spirochaeta
Methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins have been identified by sequence
analysis, in vitro methylation experiments and anti-MCP antibody in the
syphilis spirochete Treponema pallidum (Hagman et al., 1997; Greene and
Stamm, 1998) and in the oral spirochete T. denticola (Greene and Stamm,
1997; Kataoka et al., 1997; Li et al., 1999). A classical membrane topology
was predicted only for the DmcA transducer of T. denticola (Kataoka et al.,
1997). No transmembrane regions were predicted in the Mcp2 protein from
T. pallidum (Greene and Stamm, 1998), only one transmembrane region was
predicted in the DmcB protein of T. denticola (Li et al., 1999) and six transmembrane regions were predicted for the Mcpl protein of T. pallidum
(Hagman et al., 1997). Although the dmcA and dmcB mutants of T. denticola were described as impaired in chemotaxis to nutrients (Kataoka et al.,
1997; Li et al., 1999), the exact stimuli detected by these transducers are
unknown.
5.10. More Species to Come
A classical-type chemotaxis transducer has been identified in a chemolithoautotrophic acidophilic bacterium Leptospirillum ferrooxidans (Delgado et
al., 1998). The spectrum of stimuli recognized by this sensor remains
unknown. Similarly, a classical-type transducer TlpA from Campylobacter 
coli has been identified, but the tlpA mutant showed chemotaxis to all chemoattractants tested (Gonzalez et al., 1998). Hybridization with the DNA probe to
a consensus sequence of highly conserved domain and with the antibody raised
against the C-terminal sequence of Tsr from E. coli revealed multiple putative
chemotaxis transducers in Azospirillum brasilense (S. Greer and G. Alexandre,
unpublished observation). Energy taxis is the dominant behavior in A.
brasilense (Alexandre et al., 2000), and some of the transducers in this organism may represent new types of energy sensors.
6. EVOLUTIONARY CONSIDERATIONS
Earlier comparisons of transducer amino acid sequences from several
enteric bacteria revealed that some of the transducers (Tar, Tsr and Tap of E.
coli) probably evolved from a single gene (Boyd et al., 1983; Krikos et al.,
1983; Dahl et al., 1989). The sequence of the Trg transducer was diverged
enough to suggest that it may represent the fusion of a membrane transport
protein with a conserved C-terminal cytoplasmic region (Bollinger et al.,
1984).
Remarkably, Le Moual and Koshland (1996) had carded out an in-depth
evolutionary analysis of the superfamily of bacterial chemotaxis receptors
even before the first genome of a chemotactic microorganism was sequenced.
First, they recognized that the C-terminal region of the transducers, the only
common element for all of them, could be used as a phylogenetic marker.
Although only 29 protein sequences were available at that time, the major
conclusions of their analysis do not seem to have been changed by the
increasing number of transducer sequences from various phylogenetic groups
of organisms. The same monophyletic clusters of y-proteobacteria, Grampositive bacteria and Archaea found with the first 29 sequences are observed
in a phylogenetic tree constructed by alignment of the C-terminal region of
more than 120 chemotaxis transducers (S. Bulloch, S. Greer, G. Alexandre
and I.B. Zhulin, unpublished results), as it was found with only 29
sequences. The phylogenetic analysis by Le Moual and Koshland (1996)
suggested that methylation of chemotaxis transducers occurred in the
common ancestor of Bacteria and Archaea and that transducers were also the
subject of a lateral gene transfer. There was a distinct evolutionary trend to
make a transducer molecule 'shorter'. Transducers from y-proteobacteria
have four 14-residue deletions in the cytoplasmic C-terminal module and
transducers from most oc-proteobacteria have two such deletions, in comparison with transducers from Archaea and Gram-positive bacteria (Le
Moual and Koshland, 1996). 
