7. TRANSDUCERS IN THE POSTGENOMIC ERA
7.1. Diversity and Conservation within the Superfamily
The presence of a conserved signaling module in the C-terminus necessary for
sensory transduction in all microbial transducers makes it a relatively easy task
to identify corresponding sequences in microbial genomes. Indeed, so far, all
known and putative chemotaxis transducers have been successfully detected in
completely sequenced microbial genomes by a corresponding sequencing team.
However, annotation of transducers proved to be rather complicated due to a significant variation of sequences in their N-terminal region and a large number of
paralogs. In fact, so far, no sensory function has been predicted from sequence
analysis for any chemotaxis transducer in any microbial genome. Where such
attempts were made based on the sequence similarity of the C-terminal region,
erroneous results have been obtained (for details, see Zhulin, 2000). Even a
superficial glance at more than 120 sequences of chemotaxis transducers available from public databases allows one to observe the fact that has been well
documented in the pregenomic era: all transducers share the conserved C-terminal signal module and have a variable N-terminal sensing module. Thus,
conservation of the transducer superfamily is determined by the presence of the
C-terminal signaling module (Le Moual and Koshland, 1996) and diversity
within the superfamily is determined by a variety of N-terminal sensing modules.
7.2. Genomic Distribution
Several observations arise from the analysis of the transducer distribution
within 12 completely sequenced microbial genomes available from public
databases (Table 2).
.
.
All microorganisms that have general chemotaxis genes (CheA, CheW,
CheY, etc.) also contain genes encoding chemotaxis transducers. This indicates that all chemotactic representatives of Bacteria and Archaea utilize
the same design of the signal transduction system (transducers/
CheA/CheW/CheY/motility apparatus) for controlling their motility.
Microorganisms that do not have genes for flagellar motility (but may
have gliding or pili-based motility) contain genes that code for chemotaxis
transducers, e.g. Synechocystis spp. (Kaneko et al., 1996), Deinococcus
radiodurans (White et al., 1999). This is in good agreement with the proposed role of chemotaxis transducers in directing the gliding motility in
Myxococcus xanthus (see section 5.4) and the pili-based twitching motility
in P. aeruginosa (Darzins, 1994). 
3. The number of transducer genes per genome may vary from two in
Archaeoglobus fulgidis (Klenk et al., 1997) to more than 20 in
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (www.pseudomonas.com). The experimentally
determined number of chemotaxis transducers in several microbial species
is within this range (Deckers and Voordouw, 1996; Rudolph et al., 1996;
Zhang et al., 1996b; G.H. Wadhams and J.P. Armitage, unpublished data;
S.E. Greer and G. Alexandre, unpublished data). There is no apparent correlation between the genome size and the number of chemotaxis
transducers per genome. For example, the genome of Campylobacterjejuni
is three times smaller than that of E. coli, but it contains twice as many
chemotaxis transducers. The number of transducers and their sensing repertoire may reflect the environment where a microorganism finds itself and
the necessity to explore it. On the other hand, it may be just an intrinsic
characteristic of a particular genome to contain a large number of paralogs or hypervariable sequences (Parkhill et al., 2000).
4. Although some of the transducer genes are located within major chemotaxis operons, most of them are scattered randomly throughout a genome.
This is in contrast to general chemotaxis genes (CheA, CheW and CheY),
which are always located in gene clusters. One of the potential implications
of this fact is that genes coding for particular chemotaxis transducers may
be co-transcribed with other, non-chemotactic genes. This may lead to
such phenomena as environmental control of transducer expression in some
species (Harrison et al., 1999). Transducer genes appear to be mobile
genetic elements and subjects of a lateral gene transfer. Occurrence of
transducer genes on plasmids (Brito et al., 1996; Freiberg et al., 1997; Yost
et al., 1998; Grimm and Harwood, 1999) and transposons (Allmeier et al.,
1992) is in agreement with this notion.
Many of the transducer genes are paralogs i.e. they have originated within
a particular genome by gene duplication. This dramatically decreases the
probability of a successful function prediction for transducer proteins from
sequence analysis. For example, Tsr and Tar are related to each other more
closely than to any other transducer from non-enteric bacteria. Yet, the
stimuli recognized by the transducers are quite different. As with any other
paralogs, very few changes in the amino acid composition led to acquisition of a new function for chemotaxis transducers.
Table 2 summarizes the genomic distribution of chemotaxis transducers and
also shows their classification with respect to the membrane topology.
7.3. Topology Analysis: Extracellular and Intracellular
Sensing
Since most of the structure/function studies have been performed with E. coli
chemotaxis transducers, their membrane topology is regarded as classical.
First, most of the 120 chemotaxis transducers from different organisms, for
which such analysis has been performed, have the same topology (E.
McKinley and I.B. Zhulin, unpublished results). Second, this type of membrane topology and a dimerization mechanism are the features common not
only for the chemotaxis transducers, but also for eukaryotic receptors (Stock,
1996). However, transducer-like proteins from the chemotactic bacteria M.
xanthus (McCleary et al., 1990), Sinorhizobium meliloti (Greck et al., 1995)
and Rhodobacter sphaeroides (Ward et al., 1995) were previously reported to
have a different membrane topology. Furthermore, topology analysis of 13
chemotaxis transducers in the archaeon Halobacterium salinarum revealed
three distinct classes: membrane-bound proteins with and without a periplasmic region, as well as soluble cytoplasmic proteins (Rudolph et al., 1996;
Zhang et al., 1996a). Distinct functions have been determined for 'non-classical' transducers, such as membrane-bound transducers, McpA in R.
sphaeroides (Ward et al., 1995) and Aer in E. coli (Bibikov et al., 1997;
Rebbapragada et al., 1997), and the cytoplasmic Car transducer in H. saIinarum (Storch et al., 1999). The transducer membrane topology appeared as an
important feature for the function determination or prediction. We have predicted the membrane topology for all chemotaxis transducers identified in
completely sequenced microbial genomes (Table 2). The dense alignment surface (DAS) algorithm for identification of transmembrane (TM) t~-helices in 
prokaryotic membrane proteins (Cserzo et al., 1997) was used for this analysis. In order to confirm the molecular orientation in the membrane, the
presence of positively and negatively charged amino acids in close proximity
to the TM regions was inspected (Boyd et al., 1998), and the signal sequence
was predicted by using the SignalP program (Nielsen et al., 1997). Typical
results obtained by using the DAS method are shown in Fig. 3. A classical two
TM pattern with a predicted periplasmic region (class I) was observed for
most transducers from completely sequenced genomes (Table 2) and other
sequences available from the non-redundant database (E. McKinley and I.B.
Zhulin, unpublished results). Predicted membrane-bound transducers without
a periplasmic region fell into two classes. Class II consists of transducers that
have a single hydrophobic patch between a putative sensing and a signaling
module that are located in the cytoplasm. The Aer redox transducer (Bibikov
et al., 1997; Rebbapragada et al., 1997) exemplifies this topology class.
Transducers from class III have the hydrophobic patch in the very N-terminus
without obvious demarcation between a sensing and a signaling domain. The
photoreceptor from Synechocystis sp. is a typical representative of class III
(Zhulin, 2000). The patch may consist of a single hydrophobic region or contain several (two to seven) TM regions. The members of class IV have no TM
regions, all predicted to be cytoplasmic.
Although predicting the membrane topology is an essential step in characterizing a given transducer, similarity in topology does not mean functional
similarity. For example, the Aer protein from E. coli and the YoaH protein from
B. subtilis have exactly the same membrane topology (class II), but their Nterminal sensing modules are entirely different. The redox-responsive PAS
domain, which has been identified as a sensor module in Aer (Zhulin et al.,
1997), is not present in YoaH. Conversely, proteins with a similar domain
structure may have a different membrane topology. For example, both Aer and
the McpA protein from Agrobacterium tumefaciens have the N-terminal
module consisting of a single PAS domain, but no TM regions are found in
McpA. In many cases, predicting the membrane topology is an essential step
in further characterization of a transducer sequence, the domain analysis.
7.4. Domain Analysis
7.4.1. Conserved Signaling Module
Le Moual and Koshland (1996) have performed the first detailed analysis of
the conserved C-terminal module based on a comparison of transducer
sequences from 16 microbial species. Their conclusions and predictions proved
to be very accurate. Here, I provide some new data and results of other authors
that supplement and strengthen the results of that analysis. 
7.4.1.1. The HAMP Domain (Formerly, 'the Linker'). Improved algorithms for
protein sequence analysis allowed Aravind and Ponting (1999) to suggest that
the linker region located between TM2 and MD1 in chemotaxis transducers (see
Fig. 2) is a distinct signal transduction domain. The domain was termed HAME
since it was present in three major superfamilies of signal transducing proteins: histidine kinases, adenylate cyclases and methyl-accepting chemotaxis
proteins (chemotaxis transducers). The HAMP domain was found in proteins
from both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, including those that lack transmembrane regions. Therefore, the original hypothesis by Parkinson and Kofoid
(1992) was extended beyond transmembrane signaling. Most likely, the HAMP
domain acts not as a linker that mediates association of signaling complexes, but
rather as a sensor of conformational changes. Sequence analysis revealed that
some chemotaxis transducers contain two HAMP domains (Aravind and
Ponting, 1999) that are usually located between TM1 and MD2. The HAMP
domain was also reported in the N-terminal region of the class III transducer
Slr0041 from the cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. (Zhulin, 2000). The presence of two HAMP domains in one transducer is not restricted to a particular
phylogenetic class, since this occurs in such distantly related groups as Archaea,
cyanobacteria and o~-proteobacteria (Aravind and Ponting, 1999; Zhulin, 2000).
7.4.1.2. Methylation Domains. Both MD1 and MD2 in proteobacteria contain
a 14-amino acid residue deletion in comparison to those from Archaea and B.
subtilis, which corresponds to two seven-residue repeats found throughout the
C-terminal module (Le Moual and Koshland, 1996). Comparative sequence
analysis revealed significant similarity between MD1 and MD2 within a given
transducer and between transducers from different organisms. In some cases,
MD1 from one transducer is more closely related to MD2 than to MD1 from
another transducer and vice versa (G. Alexandre and I. Zhulin, unpublished
observation). This supports the notion that each methylation region represents
an independent structural element, a domain. Sensitive methods of sequence
comparison reveal similarity between chemotaxis transducers and functionally
unrelated myosin from eukaryotes. This reflects a similar design of coiled
coils.
Methylation sites were predicted in several transducers from other bacteria
(Le Moual and Koshland, 1996), often at positions that are different from
those in the E. coli proteins. Differences in the length of methylation domains
and in positions of methylation sites may account for differences in the methylation/demethylation process in such organisms as B. subtilis and H. salinarum
(Kirby et al., 1999, 2000; Perazzona and Spudich, 1999; Zimmer et al., 2000).
Although an extended consensus sequence for the methylation sites has been
established by Le Moual and Koshland (1996), the authors mentioned that
some differences in the sequence neighboring a putative methylation site may
result in a site that is less efficiently methylated or even not methylated. 
Therefore, only experimental approaches (for recent examples, see Perazzona
and Spudich, 1999; Zimmer et al., 2000) can provide evidence for methylation/demethylation of particular sites within methylation domains.
7.4.1.3. HCD. Multiple alignment of more than 120 transducer sequences
from different evolutionary branches of Bacteria and Archaea allowed us to
generate a 90% consensus for a signature motif in the core of the HCD (Fig. 4).
This core of the HCD forms a hairpin of the C-terminal module and an insertion, which is present in a very few transducers, is located between two glycine
residues that make crucial turns within the hairpin. Significant deviations from
the consensus, in particular transducer sequences, may represent either an
extreme divergence of the gene or its 'silence', resulting from an accumulation
of mutations. For example, transducers MCP1 from Borrelia burgdorferi and
PH1994 from Pyrococcus horikoshii that have been identified in completely
sequenced genomes both have changes in more than 60% of conserved positions and are predicted to be either non-functional or to have a function slightly
different from that of traditional chemotaxis transducers. Such a transducer
may not be able to interact with the CheW protein, but still interact with other
transducers in the cluster. On the other hand, the HtrI transducer from H. salinarum has an insertion in the middle of the core, but all other residues of the
core are conserved, which makes it fully functional.
7.4.2. Sensing Domain Repertoire
7.4.2.1. The Periplasmic Domain of Chemotaxis Transducers of Enteric
Bacteria. It is still a common view that there is little sequence similarity
between the sensing modules of the four chemotaxis transducers of E. coli, Tar,
Tsr, Trg and Tap. However, improved algorithms for detecting sequence similarity, such as the Position-Specific-Iterative (PSI) BLAST program (Altschul
et al., 1997), reveal that there is statistically significant similarity between the
N-terminal domains of these transducers and those from close enteric relatives,
which suggests a common fold (I. Zhulin, unpublished observation). This supports the previous prediction that the basic structure of the periplasmic domain
in different transducers from E. coli and S. typhimurium is the same (Mowbray
and Sandgren, 1998). The overall fold of the periplasmic ligand-binding
domains of all classical enterobacterial transducers should be similar to the
antiparallel four-helix bundle of the Tar protein (Milburn et al., 1991; Bowie et
al., 1995; Yeh et al., 1996). This ligand-binding domain appears to be unique
and does not share any detectable sequence similarity with periplasmic
domains from any non-enteric transducers or any other proteins. It may represent a diverged version of another sensing domain yet to be identified in
chemotaxis transducers from other species. 
7.4.2.2. The PAS Domain. As discussed above, sequence analysis of the N-terminal sensing module of the four E. coli chemotaxis transducers did not reveal
any homologous sequences outside the enteric bacteria. However, analysis of
the N-terminal sensing module of the fifth transducer, Aer, resulted in an
intriguing finding of the PAS domain (Zhulin et al., 1997). This domain occurs
in hundreds of different signal transduction proteins from all kingdoms of life
(for a review, see Taylor and Zhulin, 1999). Almost the entire N-terminal
region of the Aer consists of a single PAS domain. Several PAS-domain-containing chemotaxis transducers have been identified. Some of them are
homologs of the E. coli Aer protein (Bibikov et al., 2000; Nichols and
Harwood, 2000), whereas others are not and may contain up to three PAS
domains in their N-terminal region (Fig. 5). Studies on how the signal is transduced from the PAS domain to the signaling domain have just begun (Bibikov
et al., 2000; Repik et al., 2000). Ultimately, they should lead to an understanding of how the C-terminal signaling module recognizes different types of
conformational changes in class II and other classes of transducers.
7.4.2.3. The GAF Domain. Although the systematic sequence analysis of the
N-terminal sensing modules of chemotaxis transducers has just begun, some
interesting results have already been obtained. For example, this analysis
resulted in the identification of the first bacterial phototaxis receptor.
Surprisingly, bacterial photoreceptors have not been found using an experimental approach, although phototaxis in bacteria has been known for more
than 100 years. Two well-known signal transduction domains have been found
in silico in the Sir0041 protein from Synechocystis spp (Fig. 5): the GAF
domain and the HAMP domain (Zhulin, 2000). The GAF domain superfamily
is almost as populated as the PAS domain superfamily, when compared by
using the SMART domain identification program (Schultz et al., 1998, 2000),
and its representatives also include proteins from both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. The major function of the GAF domain is light-dependent signal
transduction (Aravind and Ponting, 1997), although the GAF domain is present in proteins from other signal transduction pathways. For example, two
GAF domains are found in the ethylene response sensor from Arabidopsis
thaliana (Chang and Shockey, 1999). Both GAF domains in the Slr0041 transducer contain conserved attachment sites for a tetrapyrrole chromophore, a
light-sensitive prosthetic group from prokaryotic light-sensing histidine kinases
and phytochromes, the plant photoreceptors (Zhulin, 2000).
7.4.2.4. The ESENS Domain. Analysis of the sensing modules of the B. subtilis
chemotaxis transducers led to the identification of yet another sensor domain
superfamily containing proteins from Bacteria, Archaea and Eukarya. The
domain, termed ESENS (extracellular sensing), comprises a major part of the
extracellular sensor module in four homologous chemotaxis transducers, McpA, 
McpB, TIpA and TIpB, in B. subtilis (Fig. 5). It is also present in three homologous transducers, PctA, PctB and PctC in P aeruginosa, as well as in several
other class I transducers from Bacteria and Archaea (I. Zhulin, submitted for
publication). The ESENS domain is also found as an input sensor module in
other signal transduction proteins from prokaryotes, such as histidine kinases
and adenylate cyclases. Surprisingly, it is also present in the extracellular subunit of the voltage-sensitive Ca 2รท channel from eukaryotes, and sensing small
molecules, such as amino acids, may be a common feature of this domain.
7.4.3. Summary of the Domain Analysis
The conserved C-terminal module of chemotaxis transducers is the signature
of the superfamily. In several genomes it can be found as an open reading
frame (Table 2). The fact that the C-terminal module of chemotaxis transducers is found only in prokaryotes, whereas some N-terminal modules present in
chemotaxis transducers are also found in eukaryotes, including humans,
reveals the chimeric nature of the superfamily. Apparently, not only whole
genes coding for transducers, but also parts of the gene coding for distinct
folds, are mobile genetic elements. Domain shuffling is responsible for creating such a great diversity of chemotaxis transducers.
8. BACK TO PHYSIOLOGY
The limits of in silico biology, at least in its current form, and the absolute
necessity for in-depth physiological studies on the chemotaxis transducers can
be clearly illustrated by the example of the newly discovered aerotaxis transducers in Halobacterium salinarum and Bacillus subtilis (Hou et al., 2000).
The heme-containing myoglobin-like HemAT transducers were identified in
the 'wet lab', where the proteins were isolated and their biochemical properties studied. Even the most sensitive computer programs for similarity search
do not easily recognize a very weak similarity between the heme-binding
domain in HemAT and that in eukaryotic hemoglobins. Interestingly,
homologs of the halobacterial HemAT protein are found in some proteobacteria, although the sites for heme attachment are missing from these proteins (I.
Zhulin, unpublished observation). Therefore, only experiments can provide
evidence for or against these homologs being the aerotaxis signal transducers.
The bioinformatics tools and approaches currently used for genome annotation cannot reveal detailed characteristics of the chemotaxis transducers.
Although computer-assisted domain analysis has provided some insights into
the diversity of the sensing domains, it cannot substitute for a 'wet bench' 
experiment. However, it is clear that bioinformatics and genomics are powerful tools for the preliminary analysis of biological macromolecules. The in
silico approach allows one to direct hypothesis-driven research into designdriven research, where more precise guesses can be made and then verified.
Two rather alarming tendencies in transducer research in the postgenomic era
can be observed. First, more and more sequences of transducers are available in
public databases, but no attempts have been made to ensure correct annotation.
Second, increasing numbers of transducers in bacteria other than E. coli are
being studied in wet laboratories without successful assignment of a function.
This may be for a variety of reasons, both subjective and objective. An objective
reason would be the complexity of the chemotaxis machinery in species that are
versatile and found in a variety of environments, such as R. sphaeroides and C.
crescentus. Multiple chemotaxis operons and differential expression of transducer genes (Hamblin et al., 1997; Harrison et al., 1999) make it difficult to
determine the exact role of a particular transducer. Another reason may be the
overwhelming power of the DNA sequencing and microbial molecular genetics
over sequence analysis and microbial physiology. Surprisingly, it is easier to
find, sequence, clone and express the transducer gene than it is to study how the
motility and taxis in a given microorganism differs from that of E. coli and
which method of measuring the chemotactic response will or will not work for
this organism. Only few laboratories have adopted a quantitative temporal gradient assay to study chemotaxis in species other than the model organisms. Even
in E. coli, without a reliable quantitative method, most of the work on chemotaxis transducers would not have been done, including, for example, recent
assigning of a new function to the Tsr transducer (Rebbapragada et aL, 1997).
9. CONCLUDING REMARKS
Chemotaxis transducers in E. coli and Salmonella comprise one of the beststudied receptor systems in biology. Genomics demonstrates that chemotaxis
transducers are widespread in the microbial world and they may play a crucial
role in adaptation of microorganisms to particular environments. The superfamily of chemotaxis transducers is growing as more microbial genomes are
being sequenced and we need to find a way to predict and confirm the functions for novel transducers. The C-terminal portion of chemotaxis transducers
has signaling and adaptation properties. Its conservation throughout all phylogenetic groups of microorganisms makes the findings obtained with E. coli
transducers directly relevant to all other species. Basic principles of signaling
that we still do not completely understand are well preserved during evolution,
although some variations on a theme are apparent. Why would one need to
study transducers in other organisms when studying them in E. coli has proven 
most productive? There seem to be at least two reasons. First, studying chemotaxis transducers in a given species will provide useful insights into the
organism's physiology and ecology. It is especially important for medical and
agricultural species. Second, just scratching the surface of the diversity of
sensory domains in microbial transducers resulted in identification of novel
sensory elements that are conserved throughout the phylogenetic tree.
Occurrence of PAS, GAF, HAMP, ESENS, and perhaps quite a few other
domains in sensory proteins from prokaryotes and eukaryotes, including
humans, is the universal theme in sensory transduction, which was wisely predicted at the early stage of chemotaxis research (Koshland, 1980, 1983). Two
tendencies in the transducer research ensure the progress of this field of study:
(1) in-depth structure-function investigations on transducers in model organisms, such as E. coli, and (2) broad analysis of transducers in other species with
respect to their role in the organism's physiology, ecology and evolution. 
