There is much detailed information here about the evolutionary history and likely prokaryotic origins of many components of the eukaryotic spliceosome. I assume that it is up-to-date and correct. We seem now to know quite a bit about this, and have little doubt that the last eukaryotic common ancestor (LECA) already had a modern-type splicing apparatus and many introns requiring its services (see the author’s reference 38, and Rogozin et al., 2012, Biol Direct 7:11). Nobody now seems to question the notion first mooted by Cavalier-Smith (1991, Trends in Genetics 7:145–148), that introns entered eukaryotic nuclear genomes as transfers of group II introns from the alpha-proteobacterial endosymbionts that became mitochondria, and, as RNAs, broke down into something like the “five easy pieces” described by Sharp (authors’ reference 66). My “introns early” hypothesis (1978, Nature 272: 581–582), appealing as it might have appeared in the late 1970s, is dead and buried.
But there are many questions still to be answered, I think. For instance, why, if invasion of the nuclear genome by Group II introns from mitochondria happened before LECA, and eukaryotic nuclear genomes provide a wealth of targets (non-protein coding regions) where it could happen again, has it not? Inferred genetic and physiological barriers seem (Truong et al. 2015, PLoS Genet 11: e1005422) too weak to explain total absence.
Another question worth pondering: it is relatively easy to imagine how selective and neutral processes could have given rise to the remarkable complexity of the spliceosome. Indeed, I particularly like how this paper gives credence to the latter, especially what has been called “Constructive Neutral Evolution” (authors’ references 9 and 15). Much harder to imagine is how a complex spliceosome, once it has become essential to the expression of most of the genes in a genome, could ever be simplified. And yet it has been, several times. This may be no more amazing than other instances in which what seem to be wired-in fundamental processes and structures can be completely dispensed with or radically transformed. Selection might be not nearly so important as we Darwinists want to believe, either in the building or the dismantling of complexity (author’s reference 18).

Finally, and to me most interestingly, how can we combine multi-level selection theory with reasoning about introns as adaptations (Doolittle, 1987, Cold Spr Hbr Symp Quant Biol 52: 907–913)? It may well be that multicellular eukaryotes of a certain type (us, for instance) have gained considerable evolvability (and consequent diversity) from having alternatively spliceable introns. But clearly, introns were not added to the genome of LECA so that more than a billion years later this advantage could be realized. Authors are (although too circumspectly in my opinion) down on such teleological rationalizing, but might we imagine such evolvability to be an adaptation at some much higher level (clades above species, Doolittle 2017; Phil Sci 84: 275–295)?