This is a complex, challenging and ambitious paper. I will leave the bioenergetics to reviewers more competent in that area, and comment or expand on just a few of the Nick Lane's general evolutionary propositions. There's enough in his paper to take up several issues of Biology Direct
Nick Lane argues against there having been a long period for the stepwise acquisition of the many features that distinguish all and every eukaryote from all and every prokaryote. If that time were long, many lineages which had not yet got all of these features might be expected to have diverged, and some should have left survivors. These would be true "archezoa", sensu Cavalier-Smith. Since such survivors are not found we might justifiably assume a very rapid evolution of the many eukaryote-defining features, driven by selection and (Lane postulates) an elevated mutation rate, this from "early bombardment of genes and introns from the endosymbiont to the host cell".

This is not a new argument, but it is very well articulated here, nicely cartooned by Figure ​Figure2.2. I myself used to favor the neglected alternative, what I call the "Fourth Domain Hypothesis". With this we would imagine a fourth lineage, diverging below the root at the bottom of the trees in Figure ​Figure2,2, bearing homologs of many of the genes now found in bacteria and archaea but also developing those many distinguishing eukaryotic features, with one of its sub-lineages serving as the host in the initial mitochondrial symbiosis. The added distance down and up the tree would be enough to account for the generally great distance between eukaryote-defining genes and their prokaryotic homologs, only some few of these being still recognizable.

This would be a sort of the reciprocal solution: we don't have to imagine a time-compressing speeding up of the evolution of novelties, but we do have to propose that all the other lineages of the fourth domain went extinct. It's not clear to me why this alternative should be so widely neglected now. Mitch Sogin and Hy Hartman (though not generally in agreement) both used to like the idea. Lane's argument that the fact that lineages that we once thought to be Archezoa seem to have arisen several times and are doing fine makes it even less parsimonious to imagine the extinction of any true Archeozoa is a good one, though.

I do not think that the "early bombardment of genes and introns from the endosymbiont to the host cell", the kind of enhanced mutation that Lane wants to claim as a sort of necessary side-effect in his scenario, will necessarily fill the bill. If current numts and nupts are the model for bombardment (and we have no other model), how much do we really expect basal mutation rate to be elevated by endosymbiosis? And is it a given that mutation rates in eukaryotes are actually elevated in a way that would speed up the evolution of evolutionary novelty? In a 1998 summary [143], Jan Drake, the Charlesworths and Jim Crow write ...

"Mutation rates in microbes with DNA-based chromosomes are close to 1/300 per genome per replication ... Mutation rates in higher eukaryotes are roughly 0.1-100 per genome per sexual generation but are currently indistinguishable from 1/300 per cell division per effective genome (which excludes the fraction of the genome in which mutations are neutral)."

Maybe there is an argument that domain shuffling and gene rearrangements that this bombardment might have especially favored are in fact just what was needed to evolve the new eukaryotic functions, in which case Lane might want to make it more explicitly.
Lane argues that both prokaryotes and eukaryotes "speciate profligately". I think this is a bit bold, when we really have no good definition or understanding of the possible meaning of species in prokaryotes and only a limited definition for some eukaryotes. Jeff Lawrence's clever title "Speciation without species" [144] notwithstanding, I'm not sure we can have one without the other. Indeed, recently, I've started to wonder whether a case could be made for the difference between eukaryotes and prokaryotes having to do with the different degrees to which species--defined as units on which species selection might operate--might exist among them. Good tight species might allow more complex hierarchical selection, which arguably might be how and why the tempo and mode of prokaryotic and eukaryotic evolution seem so different. (Just saying.) It also might be that it is the multi-"species" community--rather than the individual organism--that is the appropriate unit for comparing prokaryote and eukaryote complexities (again, just saying.)

Similarly, there is a lot packed in to Lane's claim that "the requirement for sex also implies that the population was small; large stable populations should speciate, as indeed happened immediately after the crystallization of LECA, with a near immediate radiation of the eukaryotic supergroups." To be sure, small populations, which large eukaryotes might of necessity have, are better for fixing neutral or even deleterious traits, like introns, possibly. But the first eukaryotes were surely not large organisms and it's not clear why they should have had smaller populations than their still-prokaryotic sisters. And unless we want to argue that all those eukaryote-specific complex traits that LECA supposedly quickly acquired--phagocytosis, cytoskeleton, endomembrane system and so forth--arose neutrally, it would be easier to see them arising in a large population where selection could be more effective, and perhaps easier still if there were many "species" with such populations, swapping advancements by lateral gene transfer, for all that process is in Lane's view "inherently asymmetric". Of course some of us might argue that many eukaryote-specific complex traits indeed arose neutrally [145], but that's not I think the kind of scenario Lane has in mind here.