This impressive paper is a bit like prokaryotic genome evolution itself: amazingly complex and with tantalizing hints of underlying order, but the only certainty is in the details. I'm not competent to critique the methods Prof. Beiko employs here, but do want to add a few comments, mostly about words and concepts and the shifting nature of the connections between systematics and phylogenetics. I see this paper as pivotal to a renegotiation of these connections, and it would be interesting to know if Prof. Beiko does too.

There was systematics before Darwin and there will be systematics after LGT. What Darwin did was claim that systematics, properly understood, is phylogenetics. That natural classifications are naturally hierarchical because phylogenetics is about lineage bifurcation is half of his theory. But if phylogenetics-by which I mean the generation of phyla, not the making of trees-is more complicated than that, then there is no uniquely justifiable way to convert phylogenies to classifications, which become once again a matter for negotiation, not discovery.

"Once again" is especially appropriate in the microbial context because-as Woese has reminded us repeatedly-before 16S rRNA became the "universal molecular chronometer", microbial systematists had given up on any larger evolutionary taxonomy and were learning to be content with identification being the only realizable goal of classification. What LGT means is that identification may now also be the only justifiable goal.

But the community at large has yet to accept that, and Prof. Beiko seems a bit reluctant to come right out and say it himself, in this otherwise admirable essay. Instead he still speaks of LGT as something which "complicates our efforts to assess the degree to which different organisms are related" rather than as something which defines their relationships. Probably many people doing phylogenetics, whether seeking to make trees or nets, still believe that there is something we might call a true phylogenetic position for any species or strain or individuals, and that is a matter for discovery, not negotiation.

But once we accept genomic mosaicism (and Prof. Beiko's figures, especially Figure ​Figure10,10, provide stunning illustrations), we are obliged to ask which genes count most in determining this position and whether a preponderance of genes disagreeing with rRNA is enough to trump its claim. Indeed we could ask whether we might allow phenotypic characters (and especially medically relevant ones) of the sort on which Bergey's Manual of Determinative Bacteriology was based in the pre-rRNA days, back in the door. There are instances in which such characters are more predictive of broader clinical phenotype than is phylogenetic position based on trusted markers (for example Ogura et al. 2009, Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:17939-44), and in the metagenomic and human microbiomic communities the notion that taxonomic inventories are less useful than surveys of functional gene repertoires has gained wide acceptance. Once again, we can hope for useful guides to identification but a truly natural hierarchical classification is not achievable, in practice or principle.
Either we don't really disagree or are agreeing to. It's actually hard to think of any evolutionary biological argument that does not to take the form that the TOL/TOC debate has taken. First we all endorse model A, then model B is cast in opposition to it, then it is accepted that both have merit, but efforts are made to quantify their relative applicabilities-with A-ists and B-ists each trying to bias the results in their favor. Then (though we are not quite there yet) we come to realize that there is no agreeable-upon measure of relative strength. He and I would agree that it is possible (but not proveable) that no gene in any genome is the product of an unbroken lineage of vertical descent events dating back 3.8 billion years, and that it is probable (even proven) that very few are. This to me is total victory for us "enthusiastic lateralists". But he and I would also agree that vertical descent events outnumber LGTs a gazillion to one, and that much can be learned by mapping events (LGTs and other) to trees made from core genes, seemingly a capitulation to the camp of "committed verticalists".
So what it boils down to mostly is the meaning of words like "relationship" and "natural" (with respect to classification), and whether we think higher taxa are anything but reified conveniences. And maybe there is one substantive quibble, about the Tree of Cells. Any model we accept for the origin of eukaryotes will violate treeness (which I take to preclude anastomoses), as will the primary and any number of secondary plastid endosymbioses. And then we have to admit that quite large chunks of DNA can be transferred between prokaryotic cells of different "species" by conjugation, which involves a sort of cell fusion, albeit temporary. So really even the Tree of Cells has issues.