Pandoraviruses are fascinating new organisms, which illustrates the capacity of viruses to produce drastically different types of virions, with strikingly different structures and genomes encoding from 2 genes up to 2500 genes [1]. In this paper, Yutin and Koonin have revisited the genomes of the two isolated Pandoraviruses and identified 6 of the 17 core NCLDV genes which consistently group within Phycodnaviridae (one of the NCLDV – or Megavirales – families) in phylogenetic analyses. They concluded that Pandoraviruses evolved from smaller Phycodnaviridae. The implication is that giant viruses (Mimiviridae and Pandoviruses) evolved twice independently from smaller viruses and not from cellular organisms.

The authors did not discuss the possibility that some Pandoravirus ancestor captured these 6 genes as an operon from a Phycodnavirus. We know that LGT can indeed occur between viruses co-infecting the same hosts. The authors state that: “in none of the trees pandoraviruses would cluster with any viruses outside the family Phycodnaviridae”. However, it seems that the dual specificity phosphatase NCVOG0040 branch with Mimiviridae (Lausannevirus and Marseillevirus) suggesting that LGT have indeed occurred between Pandoraviruses and Mimiviridae. In their paper, Philippe and co-workers mentioned the existence of 17 genes of P. salinus that have their closest homolog (34% identical residues in average) within the Megaviridae [6]. This seems in contradiction with the results reported here.
The presence among the 6 core genes related to Phycodnavirus of the packaging ATPase typical of viruses whose major capsid protein (MCP) contains a double-jelly roll fold structure is intriguing, since such MCP has not been detected in Pandoraviruses. This suggests several possibilities:

1) Pandoraviruses do encode an MCP that share ancestry with that of Phycodnaviruses, but is highly divergent and cannot be detected by sequence similarity.

2) The structural proteins of Pandoraviruses are unrelated to those of NCLDV, but the detected ATPase is involved in packaging.

3) The structural proteins of Pandoraviruses involved in formation of the virion are unrelated to those of megavirales and the detected ATPase is not involved in packaging.

Could the authors discuss these different possibilities? Did they use sensitive methods to specifically search for MCP? Philippe et al. identified two abundant proteins that could be involved in formation of the virion. Did the authors analyse these proteins?
Viral lineages are better defined by their capsid proteins, because these proteins are hallmarks of viruses (I use here capsid in a broad definition, including all type of structural assemblage involved in the formation of a virion) [1]. It has been shown that viruses producing homologous capsids can use different types of replicons, and that exchanges of replicons cassette genes have rather frequently occurred between viruses [23]. At the moment, it is therefore a bit premature to definitely classify Pandoraviruses as an NCLDV, because we know nothing about their virion structural proteins. One could thus imagine that Pandoraviruses belong to a novel major viral lineage and recruited in the past a cassette of replication/transcription genes from a Phycodnavirus. However, this scenario, gene cassette shuffling. is especially prevalent in viruses with small DNA genomes and has never or rarely been observed in large DNA viruses. Could the authors comment on this last point?
My feeling is that the authors’s interpretation (independent evolution of “giant” viruses from “big” viruses) is the correct one, in agreement with previous suggestion that NCLDV originated from smaller viruses predating LUCA [31] and the recent accordion model for genome evolution of Megavirales proposed by Jonathan Filée [32]. However, it will be important to obtain more insights into the origin and history of other genes of Pandoraviruses, especially those involved in the formation of the virion.
Anticipating criticisms, Yutin and Koonin remark that their analysis is a case of “tree of 1%” or less, since it is based on 7 genes only, out of 2500. However, one should not forget that the rRNA tree (0.1%) was sufficient to identify the three domains structure of the universal tree of life.
1) Philippe N, Legendre M, Doutre G, Couté Y, Poirot O, Lescot M, Arslan D, Seltzer V, Bertaux L, Bruley C, Garin J, Claverie JM, Abergel C. Pandoraviruses: amoeba viruses with genomes up to 2.5 Mb reaching that of parasitic eukaryotes. Science. 2013, 341:281-286.

2) Raoult D, Forterre P. Redefining viruses: lessons from Mimivirus. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2008, 6:315-319

3) Krupovic M, Bamford DH. Does the evolution of viral polymerases reflect the origin and evolution of viruses? Nat Rev Microbiol. 2009, 7:250;

4) Forterre P. Giant viruses: conflicts in revisiting the virus concept. Intervirology. 2010, 53:362-378.

5) Filée J. Route of NCLDV evolution: the genomic accordion. Curr Opin Virol. 2013 Jul 26. doi:pii: S1879-6257(13)00115-6. 10.1016/j.coviro.2013.07.00