The paper by Podar and co-workers describes the discovery, by single cell isolation, of a second nanoarchaeon, called Nst1, ten years after description of the first one, Nanoarchaeum equitans. This was a long awaited discovery, considering the interest of these unusual microbes and the long-standing controversy about their nature, origin and position in the archaeal phylogenetic tree. Importantly, this second nanoarchaeon (terrestrial) is only distantly related to the first one (marine) in term of genome sequence. Furthermore, whereas the host of N. equitans, Ignicoccus hospitalis is a Thermoproteales, the host of N. Nst1 is a deeply branching Sulfolobales. This allows the authors to obtain very interesting and important information about the origin and evolution of Nanoarchaea. Their analysis, especially the comparison of split genes in both species, confirm that Nanoarchaea are not the most primitive archaeon, as it has been sometimes suggested, but highly derived organisms that evolved by reduction from free-living ancestors with larger genomes and non split genes. The phylogenetic analyses also confirm the close relationships between Nanoarchaea and other Euryarchaeota, “Nanoarchaeota” emerging at the base of this phylum. This lets open the possibility to consider Nanoarchaea as members of a specific phylum, Nanoarchaeota, or as bona fide Euryarchaeota. In fact, there is still some confusion in the literature on this point, and the authors use the term Nanoarchaeota in that paper suggesting that they favour the phylum status for this group. It was originally proposed that Nanoarchaea represent an entire new phylum, based on rRNA tree in which they branched between Crenarchaeota and Euryarchaeota [1]. The same result was obtained later on with ribosomal protein phylogenies [6]. However, careful analyses shown that Nanoarchaea are more likely bona fide Euryarchaeota distantly but specifically related to Thermococcales. Single ribosomal protein phylogenies revealed that the intermediate position of N.equitans in the ribosomal protein tree (between Crenarchaeota and Euryarchaeota) was also due to the existence of a several ribosomal proteins with crenarchaeal affinity, especially in the large ribosomal subunit [6]. Does this observation hold on with this new genome? This should be an interesting point to test. The authors also obtained a basal position for Nanoarchaea in an RNA polymerase tree. However, it has been previously shown that the archaeal RNA polymerase tree is prone to long-branch attraction artifact [68]. In particular, this explains the basal position of Methanopyrus kandleri, whose RNA polymerase exhibit a high evolutionary rate, both in previously published RNA polymerase trees and in the Figure 3 of the supplementary (where it branch together with Nanoarchaea and Korarchaeota). Importantly, the clustering of Nanoarchaea and Thermococcales was also suggested by a strong synapomorphy, the presence of bacterial like RumA-type tRNA(uracil-54,C5)-methyltransferases whose genes having been probably acquired via a single horizontal gene transfer from a bacterial donor to the common ancestor of Thermococcales and Nanoarchaea (PAB0719 and PAB0760 in Pyrococcus abyssi) [69]. It would be interesting to know if these genes are also present in the new nanoarchaeon. More generally, is it possible for the authors to find or not in this new genome additional evidence for distant but specific relationships between Nanoarchaea and Thermococcales?

