In their paper, « the origin of a derived superkingdom: how a gram positive bacterium crossed the desert to become an archaeon", Valas and Bourne update the previous proposal by Gupta linking Archaea to « gram positive bacteria ». The term gram positive bacteria is really outdated, since the work of Carl Woese has shown that it has no phylogenetic meaning. In fact, the title of this paper should be: "how a Firmicutes bacterium crossed the desert to become an archaeon ». Firmicutes are one of the 20, 30 more...(it's not yet clear) bacterial phyla. It has been much more extensively studied by human for medical and biotechnological reasons, but this does not qualify it to be more than that.
In summary, Valas and Bourne proposed that both Archaea and Eukaryotes derived by transmutation from a member of Firmicutes, i.e. of one of the many bacterial phyla present today on our planet. This is revival of the old view that bacteria are primitive organisms that populated the planet much before all others (a sequel of Heckel monera). In fact, Bacteria are very evolved organisms, a superkingdom, that have been extremely successful sice they are now present everywhere and are usually much more abundant than members of the two other domains. It's unclear if they predated Archaea and ancient Eukarya, but they will certainly survive long after complex eukaryotes like us will have disappeared. I suspect that Archaea and Eukarya are the only two lineages that survive the extraordinary success of bacteria.
In my opinion, one of the reason for this success was the invention of DNA gyrase. This enzyme allows to couple directly the energetic state of the cell (the ATP/ADP ratio) to the expression of all genes at once in modulating the supercoiled state of the chromosome. Once you become addict to DNA gyrase, you can't let it go. The last bacterial common ancestor had a DNA gyrase, and all modern bacteria still have it. Some archaea succeeded to get gyrase from bacteria, they are now fully dependent of it. Plants also get gyrase from cyanobacteria, one possible reason for their success ?? The idea that a poor Firmicutes abandoned DNA gyrase to escape antigyrase drug producers does not seem realistic to me. Unfortunately for too many human patients, gyrases have found many way to become multi drug resistant without having to abandon it. In general, bacteria have been very efficient to thrive happily in all possible « deserts » that one can imagine, including hot springs up to 95°C. Hyperthermophilic bacteria or desiccation resistant bacteria are not en route to become archaea but bona fide bacteria. I cannot discuss in details all ad hoc hypotheses proposed by the authors to explain how a Firmicutes become an archaeon.
They have certainly done a huge amont of bibliographic work and hard thinking which will help them in future debates on the origin of the three domains, but in my opinion, they have reached an impasse in trying to revive Gupta's hypothesis. For me, all hypotheses that invoke the transmutation of one domain (in its modern form) into another are definitively wrong. It is the same for hypotheses in which a combination of modern archaea and bacteria produced a protoeukaryote.
I fully agree with Carl Woese who already wrote several years ago that « Modern cells are fully evolved entities. They are sufficiently complex, integrated, and "individualized" that further major change in their designs does not appear possible, which is not to say that relatively minor (but still functionally significant) variations on existing cellular themes cannot occur or that, under certain conditions, cellular design cannot degenerate". Firmicutes are modern cells, they cannot have experienced "major change in their designs" to become archaea and later on eukarya. These transmutation hypotheses put us backward in the pre-Woesian era, when evolution was viewed as a succession of steps from simple organism (moneraprokaryote-bacteria) to lower eukaryotes, then to higher eukaryotes, then to human (the scala natura). Definitely, a bacterium cannot be transmutated into an archaeon, even by a virus.
A virus take over of the replication apparatus could have created a bacterium with a novel replication apparatus, that's all. This would not have changed bacterial lipids, membranes, ribosomes, proteasomes, ATP synthases, transport sustems, metabolism,........ Possibly, one day, among the ten of thousand of bacteria whose genomes will be sequences, one will find one bacterium with an atypical replication system of recent viral origin, but I bet that this bacterium will have « bacterial ribosomes » and so on.
If one want to understand the origin of modern domains, one has to consider that they originated in a very different world that our present one. A world with many lineages (domains or protodomains) that have now disappeared, possibly back to the cellular RNA world. This is a really difficult and fascinating objective which requires to propose sometimes bold hypotheses, but these hypotheses should take into account that the divide between the three modern domains is now so great that it cannot be crossed, even by an adventurous, desperate Firmicutes.