In this paper, Glansdorff, Xu and Labedan synthesize, update and summarize the state of the art concerning the nature of LUCA, from the viewpoint favouring a rather complex proto-eukaryotic LUCA. This viewpoint, although at odd with most current thinking, is supported by many arguments often overlooked in most evolutionary papers on early cellular evolution. The merit of this paper is to explore this possibility in a very exhaustive way. Being myself an early proponent of a proto-eukaryotic LUCA, I have of course a favourable prejudice for most hypotheses presented here, and I strongly support publication of this paper.

A very important point made by the authors is that the rooting of the universal tree in the bacterial branch does not prevent a proto-eukaryotic like LUCA, since the "prokaryotic" phenotype of Bacteria and Archaea might have originated twice independently by streamlining from the two different nodes of the universal tree. By the same reasoning, LUCA might also have been prokaryotic-like, even if the root turned out to be in the eukaryotic branch. These are quite obvious remarks for someone used to work with a correct evolutionary background, but this is not so clear for most biochemists and molecular biologists. I should confess that I have been myself misled by the wrong idea that the bacterial rooting implied de facto a prokaryotic-like LUCA. This, together with my old prejudice for a proto-eukaryotic like LUCA, explains why I scrutinize so deeply the data supporting the bacterial rooting. This is not to say that solution of the rooting problem is not important, but in any case, it will not solve the problem of the nature of LUCA (except if the root turned out to be within one of the three domains, something highly unlikely). The great challenge is to polarize the characters that are common to Archaea and Eukaryotes, are they primitive or shared derived traits? In the absence of an outgroup, this is a very difficult task.

There are other mistakes currently made in the interpretation of phylogenetic trees and the authors make one of them (a very classical one) when they conclude that the hypothesis of an hyperthermophilic ancestor for bacteria has been weakened when the positions of hyperthermophilic bacteria (Aquifex, Thermotoga) as the two earliest branching lineages in the bacterial tree have been put into question. This is based on the wrong assumption that the phenotype of a modern organism was already present at the base of the lineage leading to this particular organism. This assumption is safe only if several basal lineages share this phenotype. For instance, the hypothesis that the last common ancestor of Archaea was a hyperthermophile was for a long time supported by the fact that all basal archaeal lineages were ONLY populated by hyperthermophiles. In contrast, Aquifex and Thermotoga belong to phyla that also include mesophiles and moderate thermophiles, such as Geotoga or Hydrogenobacter. As a consequence, even if these phylaare the two earliest bacterial branches (which is probably not the case) this would not automatically lead to the conclusion that the last common bacterial ancestor was a hyperthermophile. Similarly, it seems now that the first basal branch of the archaeal tree lead to mesophilic (even psychrophilic) archaea (ref in the manuscript), but this does not imply that the last common ancestors was mesophiles or psychrophiles

I agree with Carl Woese, Norman Pace and the authors that the term prokaryote is misleading. The authors refute the proposal of Koonin and colleagues to base the term prokaryote on the translation/traduction (TT) coupling, because some uncoupled TT should occur in bacterium of the phylum Planctomyces, such as Gemmata obsuriglobus, in which DNA is separated by a nuclear-like membrane from most ribosomes. This is a weak argument, because TT coupling could occur in the nuclear compartment of G. obsuriglobus which also contains ribosomes (Fuerst, 2005). For me, the TT coupling cannot be used as a positive trait to group Archaea and Bacteria, because we don't know if the TT coupling is a convergent or a homologous trait, and, in the latter case, if the TT coupling is an ancestral or a shared derived character. Only in the last case, the TT coupling could be considered as a synapomorphy, eventually justifying a common name for Archaea and Bacteria.
Finally, as noted by the authors, the term prokaryote (before the nucleus) is not neutral since, it gives the false impression that the ancestral nature of prokaryote is well established. I suggested once to use the neutral term akaryote (without nucleus) if one really want a name to distinguish Archaea and Bacteria from Eukaryotes on a structural basis (Forterre, 1992 [Forterre, P. Neutral terms. Nature, 1992, 335, 305]). In that case, most bacteria would be indeed akaryotes, except those, like Gemmata obsuriglobus and Poribacteria, which are synkaryotes (with a nucleus) and not eukaryotes (to say that a G. obscuriglobus is a eukaryotic bacterium would be probably confusing).
The problem of the origin of the nucleus of Planctomycetes is probably too much emphasized by the authors (and sometimes ambiguously) as possibly homologous to the eukaryotic nucleus (i.e. they share a common ancestry) and testifying for the situation in LUCA. There is presently no indication that the nucleus of some Planctomycetes is homologous to our nucleus. It should be mentioned that, if all Planctomycetes have a system of internal cytoplasmic membranes, the intracytoplasmic membrane (ICM), only Gemmata species have a true nucleus (i.e. an invagination of the ICM that separates the nucleoid from a portion of the cytoplasm that contains ribosomes) (Fuerst, 2005 [Fuerst, JA. Intracellular compartmentation in planctomycetes. Annu Rev Microbiol. 2005, 59, 299–328]). The nucleus of Gemmata obscuriglobus thus could be a recent invention in Planctomycetales. It will be especially important indeed to solve this question in studying extensively the nucleus of Planctomycetes and Poribacteria. For me, the discovery of these bacterial nuclei indicates that the formation of such structure might have occurred several times independently in the course of evolution. In any case, it is quite fascinating to consider the similarities between bacterial and eukaryotic nuclei, in both cases the nuclear membrane is produced by the recruitment of an internal cytoplasmic membrane system, the ICM and the endoplasmic reticulum, respectively.
The authors suggest that RNA-cells themselves might have had a nucleus. I think this is a real possibility and, by the way, RNA nuclei still exist today. In a recent review, Miller and Krijnse-Locker (2008) [Miller, S. and Krijnse-Locker, J. Modification of intracellular membrane structures for virus replication. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2008, 6, 363–374] remind us how modern RNA viruses recruit membranes and vesicles from the endoplasmic reticulum to form viral factories in which their replication apparatus is surrounded by one or two membrane layers, with an opercule for communication with the cytoplasm (pore?) (a true RNA nucleus!). I think therefore likely that both akaryotic and synkaryotic RNA-cells were present in the RNA world.
On page 5, the authors state that "the fact that the eukaryotic cell is more complex than modern prokaryotic cell is largely the result of the endosymbiosis (of mitochondria) not of a basic trend". I don't think this is correct. I would say that it is because the proto-eukaryotic cells were already more complex than modern akaryotes (in particular capable of phagocytosis) that they have been able to enslave a bacterium to become progressively a modern eukaryotes. The more complex and mysterious part of the eukaryotic gene expression machinery is the spliceosome and I don't think that it emerged as the result of endosymbiosis. Indeed, as the authors notice themselves, it should have take a long time for the emergence of a complex spliceosome, refuting the idea of the sudden origin of spliceosomes from group II introns shortly after the mitochondrial endosymbiosis. This is for me a very convincing argument. Also why group I introns present in archaeal and bacterial genomes did not invade the eukaryotic nucleus?
For me the spliceosome (not the nuclear membrane) is the real hallmark of the domain Eukarya. All Eukarya have spliceosomes and it is absent from all Archaea and all Bacteria. Furthermore, it really points to the heart of the gene expression mechanisms. I would suggest renaming the domain Eukarya to Splicea and corresponding cells to spliceotes, instead of eukaryotes. Indeed, it's a very anthropocentric view to consider that our nucleus is the true (eu) nucleus. Does this means that G. obscuriglobus is a false or incomplete nucleus? I would thus say that Spliceotes and the bacterium G. obscuriglobus are two syncaryotes that belong to different domains with nuclei. At our present state of knowledge, these nuclei might be either homologous or analogous. I would like to read the comment of the authors on this nomenclature question. They might have ideas of better names?
Coming back to LUCA, the authors mention the paper of Delaye et al., on the monophyletic origin of ribonucleotide reductase (RNR) as an argument for a LUCA with a DNA genome. Delaye et al have missed the point here. There are three classes of RNR and they are distributed in the three domains in such way that none of them is universal. It is therefore possible that RNR were introduced later on (from viruses??) in the different lineages. Of course, one, two or the three RNR might have been present in LUCA (or in its community see below) and differentially lost thereafter, but this is only hypothetical and cannot guaranty us that LUCA had a DNA genome. By the way, the question of the real monophyly of the RNR activity is still an open question. The three classes of RNR are built around the same homologous core and use basically the same reaction mechanism, but they share this characteristic with pyruvate formate lyase (Stubbe, 2000 [Stubbe J. Ribonucleotide reductases: the link between an RNA and a DNA world? Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2000, 10, 731–736]), and the core itself cannot have RNR activity. In each class, the RNR activity is obtained by association of this core with different protein folds, domains or subunits, and the use of different cofactors. As a consequence, one cannot exclude the possibility that the RNR activity has been invented three times independently, using the same basic protein core, misleading us to believe that RNR activities are homologous.
I like very much how the authors discuss the problem of the temperature at which LUCA was living. In particular, the idea that one should take into account the notion of temperature range is welcome, as well as their critic of the Gaucher et al paper. All present data indeed support the notion of a mesophilic or moderately thermophilic LUCA and a secondary adaptation to Archaea and some Bacteria to hyperthermophily. The authors emphasize adaptation to hyperthermophily as the major selection pressure for the formation of the archaeal domain by thermoreduction. The question is more open now, with the discovery of the basal position of mesophilic Thaumarchaea and one cannot exclude that archaeal lipids originated in a mesophilic environment, but turned out to be well suited to allow some Archaea to explore rapidly the hottest environments. The replacement of ester bonds by ether bonds and the formation of monolayer lipids is indeed favoured by high temperature, but I don't see what selection pressure favoured sn2,3 versus sn1,2 lipids at high temperature. I would like very much to read the comment of the authors on this point. By the way, we possibly focus too much on the relationships between the two kinds of glycerolipids now present in the biosphere, it might be that the variety of lipids was much higher before and at the time of LUCA, and that the two types of lipids that we know have been selected randomly because they were those present in the three successful lineages at the origin of the modern domains. Anyway, I agree with the authors that it would be important to do experimental works on this issue by engineering new organisms with mixed lipids for instance.
The authors are dubious about the hypothesis proposed by several evolutionists of mixed membranes in LUCA, with both sn2,3 and sn1,2 lipids made by a non enantio-specific enzyme. The concept of a "non enantio-specific enzyme" is strange for me, and to my knowledge, has never been really discussed. In my opinion, as soon as you have a catalyst using a three-dimensional active site, you have no choice other than to select only one enantiomer for substrate and the product will be also enantio-selective. As a consequence, I don't think that non enantio-specific protein enzyme or ribozyme ever existed! The emergence of 3D catalysts explains indeed very simply why all protein amino-acids and nucleic acid sugars are of one enantiomeric form. Again, I would really like to read the comment of the authors on this question.
I completely agree with the authors that the importance of LGT has been over emphasized, and that the notion of a web of life instead of a tree of life is misleading. However, although there was certainly a relatively high level of redundancy in LUCA and its companions (as in modern organisms), I have the feeling that the authors tend to go too far in refuting the existence of LGT between domains. They are many clear-cut evidences for such transfers. They are indeed rare and usually easy to detect through phylogenetic analyses, so that they cannot confuse species tree when analyses are properly done. The rarity of LGT between domains is well illustrated by the quasi-absence of exchange between archaeal Topo VI and bacterial Topo IV, two enzymes that have exactly the same catalytic activities. Only three out of more than 500 sequenced bacterial genomes have acquired an archaeal Topo VI, and none of the presently archaeal genomes has a bacterial Topo IV. Although rare, LGT exist and can be easily identified (the three Topo VI found in Archaea branch within Archaea in Topo VI trees, whereas the DNA gyrase found in Archaea branch within the bacterial sequences in DNA gyrase trees). Furthermore, they can have a profound influence in the history of a particular lineage. For instance, the transfer of reverse gyrase from Archaea to some bacteria has probably helped their adaptation to extremely high temperature whereas the transfer of gyrase from Bacteria to some archaea has profoundly changed the internal topology of their DNA. Therefore, in my opinion, one should have a more balanced view than the authors on the importance of LGT versus paralogy/loss in global evolution and more work is required to evaluate the relative importance of these two phenomena. I think for instance that paralogy/loss is overemphasized in the work of Ouzounis and colleagues leading to a LUCA with 1000 gene families.
Paradoxically, although the authors are strong critics of the overwhelming-LGT theory, they have adopted the viewpoint of a communal LUCA which, historically, has been proposed partly to take into account this theory (see Woese [Woese CR. Interpreting the universal phylogenetic tree. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000: 97, 8392–8396]). I am not convinced, as the authors are, by the heuristic character of the concept of LUCA as a community of organisms. If cell divided by fission from the time of LUCA, one is obliged to accept the existence of a single organism as the LUCA, as we are obliged to accept from population genetic the idea of a single women (the African Eve) at the origin of all women present on Earth today. Of course, LUCA was not living alone at that time (as the African eve herself) but among many other organisms that have no descendants today. Therefore LUCA was living among a community (that we can possibly call the LUCA community) but this community (Eve's village) should not be confused with LUCA itself. Unlike the authors, I thus definitely think that LUCA has been an identifiable cell line. For me, the community concept is only helpful to fight the very naïve idea that LUCA was the only cell at that time!!! Since LUCA was not the first cell, it could not have been alone. The community concept can be misleading because – associated to the "overwhelming LGT" theory – it can lead to the conclusion that all members of this community were quite similar to each other, exchanging genes as crazy (mimicking an ideal Hippy community). On the contrary, the authors make a good point in describing a quite diverse LUCA community, with various organisms using different metabolism and more generally different ways of life (possibly with both akaryotic and synkaryotic RNA or primitive DNA cells of various sizes). One thing I would like to add in the debate is that I see no reason why the contemporaries of LUCA should have been confined to a limited location on our planet (a single chimney in the more extreme scenario). All complex RNA and/or primitive DNA cells (with their viruses) living at the time of LUCA might have already colonized all the habitable biotopes of our planet, much like modern microbes, forming many diverse communities, only one of them including LUCA. They were probably limited or no exchange at some time between isolated communities, leading to speciation and later conflict in future encounter. Again, one can draw a parallel with the village of Eve, which was probably surrounded by other villages in a particular region of Africa and many more in all Eurasia.
I agree with the authors that Darwinian evolution operated early on, well before LUCA and the origin of the three Domains. The notion of a Darwinian threshold can be interpreted as opening the way for a Lamarkian view of early evolution (usually favoured by astrophysicists and chemists who are often dominant in number in the origin of life community). The authors should be aware that the notion of a "communal LUCA" can have the same effect, if one envisions the evolution of this community driven by an internal tendency for matter to evolve towards complex structures under physical principles that remains to be discovered. Physical principles can create the framework for biological evolution, but the motor will remain descendent modifications with natural selection.
Finally, since the authors often refer to the "three RNA cells-three DNA viruses (3R/3V) hypothesis", I will say that more recently, I tend to come back to a simpler "two RNA cells-two DNA viruses hypothesis (2R/2V)". For me, the interest of the 3R/3V hypothesis was to explain the existence of three well defined versions of ribosomal and other universal proteins, and also to explain some critical differences between the DNA replication apparatus of Archaea and Splicea (Eukarya), in particular their very different sets of DNA topoisomerases). The last point has been weakened by several recent findings suggesting that Topo VI and Topo IB could have been possibly already present in the common ancestor of Archaea and Splicea (Malik et al., 2007 [Malik SB, Ramesh MA, Hulstrand AM, Logsdon JM Jr. Protist homologs of the meiotic Spo11 gene and topoisomerase VI reveal an evolutionary history of gene duplication and lineage-specific loss. Mol Biol Evol. 2007, 24, 2827–2841], Brochier-Armanet, Gribaldo and Forterre, manuscript in preparation). In the same vein, we have recently discovered that a universal protein of unknown function highly similar in Archaea and Splicea (Eukarya) is a new type of apurinic endonuclease (Hecker et al., 2007 [Hecker A, Leulliot N, Gadelle D, Graille M, Justome A, Dorlet P, Brochier C, Quevillon-Cheruel S, Le Cam E, van Tilbeurgh H, Forterre P. An archaeal orthologue of the universal protein Kae1 is an iron metalloprotein which exhibits atypical DNA-binding properties and apurinic-endonuclease activity in vitro. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007, 35, 6042–51]). We have also obtained in silico evidences for the existence of an ancient regulatory mechanism coupling DNA replication and translation in Archaea and Splicea (Berthon et al., 2008 [Berthon J, Cortez D, Forterre P. Genomic context analysis in Archaea suggests previously unrecognized links between DNA replication and translation. Genome Biol. 2008: 9, R71]). All these new findings point that the last common ancestor of Archaea and Splicea had a DNA genome. In the 2R/2V scenario, the independent RNA-DNA transition in bacteria and in a common ancestor to Archaea and Splicea could explain the more dramatic difference between the bacterial and the archaeal/spliceal versions of universal proteins, compared to the differences observed between the archaeal and the spliceal version. Note that in the 2R/2V scenario, the root of the universal tree of life should be located in the bacterial branch! So I could become finally a proponent of this idea that I have been previously fighting. This explains why I especially appreciate the comment of the authors on the compatibility between the bacterial rooting and a proto-eukaryotic like LUCA.