Shalaeva et al. compare the structures of microbial rhodopsins (MRs) and G-protein coupled receptors (7TM hereafter) to propose a common functional mechanism centered on a conserved aromatic residue in TM helix 6. There has been a long-standing discussion regarding the common origin of the 7TM receptors of eukaryotes and bacterial 7TM proteins. While there have been former proposals for a convergent origin, this reviewer holds that the weight of the evidence favors a common origin for these proteins, perhaps with a larger radiation of bacterial 7TM receptors. The structural comparisons and the evidence presented by the authors make a strong case of the common origin of the MRs and eukaryotic 7TM receptors. The functional aspects uncovered as a result of this comparison certainly merit future attention in wet-lab studies.
However, the authors should consider certain issues in their functional discussion:

1) It was earlier demonstrated that eukaryotic 7TM receptors working with heterotrimeric G-proteins come in two basic types ([19]; the authors may want pay closer consideration to this paper as it is relevant to their discussion in more than one way). First, those that are fused to the intracellular RGS domains and function as GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs) for their GTPase #-subunit partners. Second those that act as GDP-GTP exchange factors (GEFs) for their G# subunits. These seem to coevolve with the selection imposed by the GTP hydrolysis rate constants of the G#s. The functional analysis by the authors focuses on the second type and seems to ignore the first type. Given that these types were present from very early in eukaryotic evolution it is important to examine if the conserved features recovered by the authors are relevant only to those that function as GEFs or also extend to those that work as GAPs. Either way it affects the final evolutionary reconstruction.

2) Several eukaryotic lineages have lost heterotrimeric G proteins but retain 7TM receptors clearly related to the GPCRs (see discussion on this in [19]). Moreover, even in lineages with G#s there is good evidence for G-protein-independent signaling via 7TM receptors. Hence, it is possible that there was always a parallel G#-independent signaling track. The authors need discuss this better because MRs work independently of G# in prokaryotes. Thus conserved features shared by them could represent a hold-over of the more ancient G#-independent signaling which still exists in eukaryotes but is merely reused in the presence of G#s