This work uses contextual information to identify the diphthine-ammonia ligase in archaea and eukaryotes. It also shows that the yeast protein YBR246W is indeed not the correct ligase, but rather the MJ0570-like PP-loop ATPases. The authors also show that this family has been transferred to certain bacteria where they infer that it is likely to have undergone a functional shift to participate in B12 salvage. They cautiously propose that it might function as a replacement for CbiZ to function as an amidohydrolase (the reverse of the typical PP-loop ATPase reaction) as against a ligase. The conclusions are definitive and the article makes a useful contribution to the understanding of protein modification and cofactor biosynthesis. This said, there are certain issues with the current form of the article that authors necessarily need to address in their revision: 1) (pg 8) The authors state that the MJ0570-like enzymes have a HUP domain followed by a distinct C-terminal domain. They do not explain the meaning of this properly nor cite the reference of the paper (PMID: 12012333) pertaining to the HUP domains where this family was identified as a PP-loop ATPase, along with the observations (Table 1 in that reference) that it has a primarilyarchaeo-eukaryotic phyletic pattern, and that eukaryotic versions might be fused to two C-terminal domains of the YabJ-like chorismate lyase fold (now termed RidA). It should be stated that the N-terminus is a PP-loop ATPase domain of the HUP class of Rossmannoid domains - not all HUP domains are ligases - only the PP-loop and the HIGH nucleotidyltransferases . This clarifies that it is related to other ATP-utilizing amidoligases such as NAD synthethase, GMP synthetase and asparagine synthetase. This would place their inferred amidoligase activity in the context of comparable, known amidoligase activities of related enzymes. In fact it would be advisable to place the fact that these are PP-loop enzymes in the abstract itself.
2) The authors persistently refer to the domain as DUF71. This name is no longer current in Pfam and it has long been recognized as mentioned in the reference noted above that these proteins are not “domains of unknown function” but PP-loop ATPases. The domain is correctly termed ATP_bind_4 (PF01902) in Pfam. This Pfam (not the misleading DUF71) name and Pfam number should be indicated with just a statement in the introduction that it was formerly DUF71.
3) The authors apparently have a misapprehension regarding the Methanohalophilus mahii protein both in the text and the domain architecture rendered in the figure. First, these proteins have two N-terminal domains fused tothe MJ0570-like module: namely aN-terminal class-II glutamineamidotransferase (GAT-II, e.g. see PMID: 20023723) and second PP-loop ATPase domain thereafter (i.e. one related to asparagine synthetase). This GAT domain as in the case of other PP-loop enzymes could supply ammonia by cleaving it off glutamine. But this does not explain which PP-loop domain utilizes it. In the case of the Asn-synthetase it is used by the cognate PP-loop domain. In this case the presence of two PP-loop domains suggests that it is either utilized by both for different reactions or else the second domain does not receive the NH3 from this GAT. This also leads to the question what reaction is the Asn synthetase like PP-loop domain catalyzing?

Quality of written English: Acceptable
4) Based on phyletic complementarity the authors suggest that bacterial CbiZ might be displaced by the bacterial MJ0570-like enzymes. This seems unusual - Why utilize a PP-loop ATPase for the reverse reaction, i.e. amidohydrolase? Typically there is little overlap between the families involved in amidohydrolase as opposed to ATP-dependent ligase activity. Of the almost 12 distinct major inventions of amidoligase activity, hardly any representatives of these superfamilies have been reused as amidohydrolases. So do the authors note anything special in the case of the bacterial representatives that might support such a functional shift?
Quality of written English: Acceptable