The manuscript “Differential signal sensitivities can contribute to the stability of multispecies bacterial communities” submitted by Juhász et al. addresses the question whether or not the differential response characteristics of bacterial species to the same quorum sensing signal can influence the coexistence of bacterial species. Given the importance of intra-specific biological conflicts in establishment of microbial communities obtaining constraints for this via theoretical models would be particularly useful. Bacterial species that respond to an environmental signal at a lower concentration threshold can in principle easily outcompete others. Hence, some of the other species may get lost from the community. If such a species happens to carry a metabolic function crucial to the community, the survival of the entire community will be jeopardized. However if a fitter species responds at a higher signal concentration level, the less fit species will still survive i.e. the metabolic repertoire of the community will be maintained.
The manuscript is clearly written but the authors may want to discuss the below points:
1) The authors propose that competitive exclusion of a less fit species that would be eliminated as per the Gause principle is precluded by the higher threshold of signal sensing. As the species shuttle between fitter and less fit regimes, it may be interesting to compare their average fitness calculated over entire the simulation period so as to show if and how the Gause principle is violated.
2) Moreover, the Gause principle was originally formulated in an intraspecific context but the authors are using models such as Chromobacter and Burkholderia which inter-specific competition. They would want discuss the generalization of the Gause principle for such scenarios.
3) The authors propose this “restraint” mechanism as playing a role in survival of bacterial communities. What would change if this mechanism did not exist? Is it conceivable that such mechanisms are selected for in the first place only in scenarios where community collapse imposes a much greater cost than the benefit from eliminating the rival organism?
It should be Gause principle? That is how the author of the original paper is spelt in English but it was Gauze in Russian?