The manuscript by Georgiades et al. is concerned with evolution of gene content in Rickettsiales, a group of alpha-proteobacteria whose genomes must have experienced considerable gene losses in the process of becoming parasites. The authors used several existing algorithms to estimate specific gains and losses and to reconstruct a putative common ancestor of the group. The conclusions of the paper seem quite reasonable, but I have several concerns about methods and about specific examples shown in the Supplement 1. I suspect that a bit more detailed explanation would set this all right. More specifically, in order: Lines 123-124: "Genes that are absent in one species could either have been lost by this species or gained by another species via HGT" - This does not have to be an 'either-or' proposition, it could be both - has this been considered?

Line 177: "After eliminating the genes gained by HGT" - after eliminating genes gained by HGT, the authors could have rebuilt the gene content tree; have this been done? Is this "purged" gene-content tree closer to the 16S RNA tree than the initial gene-content tree? And throughout the rest of the paper, which 'species tree' of the three possible trees was used (it is sometimes indicated, but not always).

Methods: line 284: In building neighbour-joining trees from the binary matrix of gene content, which intergenomic distance was used - the importance of the appropriate normalization has been emphasized in literature.

"Caulobacter was used as outgroup" - in which cases? How is it compatible with the cases, discussed in the same paragraph, when Rickettsiae were attached to the non-alpha-proteobacteria?

Lines 305-307: " When the tree topology obtained from a riCOG was similar to the phylogeny of the tree from 16 S rRNA sequences..." - does 'similar' means 'same' here (i.e., the same when branches corresponding to the species lacking this COGs are pruned in the species tree), or 'similar but not the same'?

Lines 307-309: " When, on the contrary, the phylogeny presented Rickettsiales spp. anchored in a non-alpha proteobacteria clade, we concluded that the riCOG was gained through HGT" - do the authors mean the whole riCOG, or only some genes in it? Table ​Table11 seems to indicate the latter? What if there are no alpha-proteobacteria (other than Rickettsia) in the tree (see examples?)

Lines 324-325: " The whole genome sequence-based rickettsial species tree was coupled with the algorithm." - Which one (see above), and why the choice?

Sup. file 1: are trees in this file rooted or not? They seem to be unrooted but arbitrarily shown as rooted, which may cause visual artefacts, e.g.: riCOG01685: if the tree is rearranged properly (i.e., all Metazoans, including rotifer Philodina, shown as one clade which is well-supported), we see the Rickettsia clade as a deep branch between plants and animals; where is the HGT? rioriCOG00831: Canarypox virus and Orientia spp. sequences are intermingling branches without modest support - maybe both of them are basal, again no HGT? rioriCOG00862 may be a similar situation: looks like there is a Trichomonas vaginalis clade and an Orientia spp. clade - where is the HGT evidence?