The question that Koonin and Wolf address in this communication is important in its own right, and also became a hot topic after publication of D. Theobald's Nature paper earlier this year. Even a brief communication in Biology Direct should be self-sufficient, so I think that the first thing the authors of the current study should do is to explain what Theobald did in his work, not only what he claimed to have done. Perhaps the proper place to start may be an earlier paper by Sober and Steel [6]. Theobald cites it but does not mention that his own work is, to an extent, the attempt to realize the proposal by Sober and Steel.

Discussion of all this, by both Theobald and Koonin&Wolf, is a bit confusing, at least to this reviewer, in at least two respects. First, it is unclear what hypothesis is being tested in either of the two papers. Is it a null hypothesis testing sensu Fischer, or testing of two alternate hypotheses sensu Neyman-Pearson, and in either case, what the hypothes(i/e)s is/are?

Second, I have a problem with multiple statements in both papers about this or that thing not being dependent on the hypothesis of the common ancestry. It does not require any simulation to point out, e.g., a flaw of this class in Theobald's work, when he says one cannot conclude anything direct about common ancestry from BLAST P-value, and has to infer it somehow. Surely, one must know that the inference in this case is possible because Karlin-Altschul statistics relies on the scoring system (s parameter) that is derived from the large dataset of alignments of bona fide homologous proteins! This and other examples seem to indicate that Theobald's argument may be based on tautology. Can the authors elaborate on whether their simulation is testing the circularity of the argument (and whether it is even able to do so, as the simulation itself is also not completely devoid of the evolutionary signal, having been built by sampling from the models that are derived from alignments of orthologs), or is it doing something else?

I would also be cautious asserting that there may be no good statistical test for the common ancestry in principle. For example, we may try to use a joint probability of several events occurring independently, to show that such probability is infinitesimally low, even if the probability of each individual event is not particularly low. One such collection of events may be the preponderance of non-omnipresent, but widely distributed in diverse organisms, genes that were not used to build the consensus Tree of Life, but whose own phylogeny is compatible, or at least very close, to such a tree.

Finally, some more mileage can be gotten out of explicitly rejecting the hypothesis of the convergent or parallel origin of similar protein sequences, even if not in the sense of statistical hypothesis testing, but in the more lay sense of stating that all the evidence points in the opposite direction, and none of the examples of long-range sequence convergence withstand the scrutiny. I agree with all arguments that the authors present here, but I wish that they extend their argument and mention and perhaps discuss the essay by R.F. Doolittle [11], where this is laid out in more detail.