The manuscript by Kinch and Grishin is an exhaustive refutation of an incorrect hypothesis which, however, led to some interesting observations (see below). The hypothesis by Kiriakidou et al. [1] is that the "MC motif" of human Argonaute2 and the eukaryotic translation factor eIF4A are related in sequence, presumably in structure, and in the mode of purported interaction with the mRNA cap structure. The refutation states that the "MC motif" is in fact the homolog of the known, structurally characterized Mid domain (or subdomain) of the PIWI proteins, which has structure different from that of eIF4A; that the residues in Ago2 implicated in interaction with the cap are in fact higly unlikely to do so; and that therefore the results of Kiriakidou et al. [1] need to be reevaluated.

The computational evidence presented by Kinch and Grishin is solid, and it not only shatters the computational "observation" of Kiriakidou et al. [1], but also holds extremely well against their wet-lab experiments. The fact that computer analysis, when done correctly, can give a stonger argument than biochemistry is not exactly news (see [29] for a brief discussion of the epistemological issues that are relevant here); what perhaps is more surprising is that the peer-review process in the high-profile journals like the one that published the work of Kiriakidou et al. apparently did not involve any of the state-of-the-art but freely available approaches utilized by Kinch and Grishin.

I have only two suggestions. First, even though Kiriakidou et al. most likely have misinterpreted their own site-directed mutagenesis results, their basic observations of cap-binding and other biochemical properties of the wild-type Ago2 may as well be real, and should not be (at least yet) thrown away – perhaps the authors could state not only what they refute, but also which parts of Kiriakidou et al. remain standing.

Second, the manuscript should be refashioned as a discovery note, deleting a few words here and there, folding the content of the two tables into figure legends or Methods section, and making one composite out of the three figures – they are all parts of the one statement, i.e., "MC region is the conserved Mid domain of PIWI, distinct from eIF4A and unlikely to interact with the cap", and current Figure ​Figure1A1A is perhaps a distraction – after all, the point is that Mid domain is found in most clans in Ago/Piwi superfamily, not that these clans exist.