I agree with the Author on the following:

1. If there is evidence supporting panspermy, it should be considered seriously.

2. Panspermy, if it occurred, should not prevent us from attempting to reconstruct ancestral genomes, using comparative genomics and the knowledge of planetary chemistry.

3. Early stages of evolution of Life seem to have been overloaded with evolutionary innovation, which asks for explanations. Panspermy may be one such explanation; periods of accelerated evolution, prompted in part by Lynch-Conery considerations of Ne, is another.

Having said that, I do not see any striking arguments for panspermy in this work. The "genome size as a clock" approach is, in my opinion, qualitatively correct, and it shows what we already knew, i.e., that the earliest stages of life appear to have had precious little time to progress to what are currently our best estimates of genome size and the number of protein-coding genes (on the latter, see also below). Whether the dependency is of the exponential form, however, remains to be seen.

Discussion of minimal genome in this regard is a red herring. First, the Author misreads what is in the minimal-genome literature (e.g. Mushegian and Koonin, 1997; later reviews both by myself and by Koonin; and experimental work of Hutchison, Smith and Venter, most recently Glass et al., 2006; Pubmed 16407165). Minimal genome is a construct of biochemical engineering, predicted or directly manipulated to sustain life in a rich medium with the smallest number of genes. It is not purported to model the ancestor, even though it, same as the ancestral genomes, may be constructed using methods of comparative genomics, and even though minimal genome may be enriched in ancestral genes. Second, no one ever said that the minimal or ancestral genomes have evolved by spurious assembly of 300 genes – any paper, including our own, that speculates about origins of Life, understands the problem of earlier stages clearly.

Third and most important, all this is not relevant to Author's own argument: the genome to discuss is not minimal one, but that of LUCA (last universal common ancestor). The latest reconstructions of LUCA gene content, notably Pubmed 12515582 and 16431085, come up with 600–1000 genes, which is in fact even better for the early-overload argument, so why not stick to these estimates?

Ultimately, the question is not whether "early genomes were way too complex", but, in the likely case that they were, whether panspermy better explains these observations than other hypotheses. I find it counterproductive to dismiss the Lynch-Conery theory in one sentence – at least in the sentence that directs to the Charlesworth-Barton paper, as if it is the last word on the subject. In fact, said paper is rather supportive of many observations and explanations presented by Lynch and Conery, arguing mostly with the idea of subfunctionalization (where Charlesworth's argument is an overly general one, which is understandable: coming up with any specifics here will require a lot of quite subtle analysis of the data that are not there yet) and, in a technically involved way, with the ideas of transposon dynamics (which, I think, are addressed in part by M.Lynch in Pubmed 16280547). If the author has a substantive disagreement with Lynch-Conery, let us hear it, but we haven't yet.

The "viral hypothesis", in the meantime, exists in many modifications, not all of which require modern-type viruses: see for example, Woese (series of essays in 1998–2002) and Koonin-Martin (Pubmed 16223546). With regards to absolute time scale, however, these theories may not be even that helpful, because the step from these general hypotheses to constant vs variable evolutionary rate would not be trivial.