Investigations and descriptions of fitness ridges (a fitness ridge is a function relating fitness and genotype) are necessarily difficult and confusing due to the complex and often multidimensional nature of such ridges. Thus, it is truly remarkable that in the recent past several studies have attempted to describe the shapes of fitness ridges one gene at a time. The present study is one of them. The authors study the effects of mutations on several promiscuous functions that have been selected for not ruining the activity of a related but distinct function. Indeed, under laboratory conditions the mutations that are allowed to propagate are neutral by definition, and the authors in essence studied the effect of mutations accumulated by drift. However, I do not think that the main claim of this paper, that "drift can aid functional protein evolution" is appropriate and I believe that the results are much more important to the study of fitness ridges than to the study of the impact of neutral drift.

Assuming a starting condition of such neutral evolution when the activity of promiscuous functions truly bears no fitness effects, consider the impact of the past several mutations right before this activity became a target of selection. In an equilibrium setting, those mutations are equally likely to have decreased the level of the activity as they are to have lead to an increase. Therefore, the paper could have been titled "drift can inhibit functional protein evolution" just as well. Regardless, I think that the impact of such an artificially neutral mutation on future adaptations is not the issue here. Just as with the original work by Aharoni et al. [2], the issue is the degree of pleiotropic interactions of different functions that can be performed by a single protein because understanding the nature of such interactions is crucial for our understanding of fitness ridges.

The work Aharoni et al. [2] suggested that if a new previously unused function is suddenly placed under the spotlight of selection, such new functions can be found (and substantially improved) in proteins that are already are doing something else. The present work strongly supports this assertion. The authors also found that the effect of mutations on the original function is correlated to the level of similarity of the promiscuous functions. This observation adds a very interesting and counter intuitive caveat: if the activity of the native function cannot be altered, selection has a better chance improving those functions of a gene that are more different from the original function. Obviously life is not this simple and there must be a limit to how much a promiscuous function can differ from the original. However, evolutionary examples of enzyme recruitment in the vertebrate eye lens or the evolution of antifreeze proteins have already given the proof of concept that novel functions can evolve from seemingly inappropriate genes.

Secondary comments: Second paragraph of Background section. I disagree that it is clear that only a small fraction of mutations in proteins are adaptive. For an example see: Andolfatto P. Adaptive evolution of non-coding DNA in Drosophila. Nature. 2005 Oct 20;437(7062):1149-52.

I think that one of the first papers on the impact of neutral mutations for future adaptations has been: Lipman DJ, Wilbur WJ. Modelling neutral and selective evolution of protein folding. Proc Biol Sci. 1991 Jul 22;245(1312):7–11.

First paragraph of "Overall distributions of change in the activities" section of Results: Another factor that may greatly affect whether or not mutations that change a promiscuous function are at equilibrium is whether or not there is selection against such function. Perhaps such selection is expected, because a promiscuous function may act as a competitive inhibitor of the original one. The possibility of such selection is another reason why I think that although in the laboratory these mutations are by definition neutral, we must first study the fitness function of these proteins before investigating the importance of drift.

First and second paragraphs of "Overall distributions of change in the activities" section of Results: When selection on one phenotype causes a change in another, this is called "apparent selection."

Third paragraph of Conclusions: "The adaptive benefits of this drift come when new selective pressures suddenly favor a previously irrelevant promiscuous function, in effect creating a new neutral network that overlaps with parts of the old one." If a new selective pressure appeared, it changed the neutral network to a ridge. In general I think that the term "neutral network" should be avoided because it describes a specific model where each mutation is either lethal or neutral. This is exactly replicated in this experimental setup, however, as soon as adaptive selection comes into play the "neutral network" model becomes insufficient to describe either the fitness states of each genotype or the evolutionary processes that follow. In general, the term "fitness ridge" or "fitness landscape" is preferable for this reason.

I would be interested to see the correlations of the change of each promiscuous function to that of the native one. Figure 2 and 3 but with the values showing a correlation. Just by looking at Fig 2, it seems that every single function is actually correlated, but it would be interesting to see how much.