The authors introduce a new variant of the Bellman-Harris Branching Process to improve the mathematical description of the decision-making process in cultured CD8+ T lymphocytes and apply their model to labeling data, to demonstrate its superiority over the competing risks model. The new variant of the process allows the decision to proceed to either to proliferation or to apoptosis (or to quiescence) to precede the act of division or apoptosis initiation. It results in a slightly modified integral equation for the probability generating function of the process. Since the CFSE-labeling allows distinguishing between cells which underwent different numbers of division, as well as quantifying the increase in cell number, fitting models to the CFSE data appears quite meaningful. In my opinion, the paper is worthwhile and publishable. I have several remarks which may improve the contents and clarity of presentation.

1. The process Zg,s(t) (p. 8) does not seem to be a point process.
2. Page 13. The sentence starting from "Clearly, the conditional distribution ..." does not seem to be very precise. I would suggest stating the property discussed in the terms of independence of random variables, so that ambiguity is avoided.
3. An application to human CD8+ T lymphocytes. I understand that in this application, independence between mother and daughter lifetimes is assumed. This might be worth stressing, particularly since one page earlier, in Proposition 1, independence is not required.
4. Data analysis using a competing branching process. I find the section written in a somewhat confusing way. Among other, it is first stated that "A likely explanation for the lack of fit of the competing risk process is that the times to death were estimated as being much shorter than the times to division using the full model." However, several lines down, the mean time to division is said to be estimated as 14.3 hours whereas the mean time to death as 14.7 hours. Please clarify.
5. Effects of cellular dependencies. There exists a whole class of models, developed mainly in the 1980s, which look for the source of dependencies in cell size/growth rate regulation. A relatively complete review is contained in Webb's paper in Computers & Mathematics with Applications (Volume 18, Issues 10-11, 1989, Pages 973-984).
6. Further quantitative insights into the kinetics of CD8 T cells. It seems somewhat disappointing that this discussion does not return to the original motivation, which was the organization of fighting the infection by the T lymphocytes. Maybe something might be added?

