The manuscript describes an interesting extension of authors' earlier Graded Autocatalysis Replication Domain (GARD) model. The new model called Chiral-GARD (or C-GARD) is introduced to explain the symmetry breaking between left- or right-handed biomolecules in the modern biosphere. The main conclusion is that a strong symmetry breaking can result from a relatively modest asymmetry in mutual (auto)catalytic activity: that is D-enantiomers that are more likely to catalyze other D-enantiomers than L-enantiomers, while L-enantiomers preferentially catalyze their L-brothers and sisters. BTW, the very term enantiomer should be explained early on in the text for the benefit of uninitiated. This catalytic asymmetry is quantified by the parameter alpha. Authors have some idea about the range and distribution of alpha from the CHIRBASE database (see Fig. ​Fig.1212 of the manuscript (Authors comment: Figure ​Figure1111 in the final version)). The minimal value of alpha required for symmetry breaking in their model is somewhat larger than the typical value of entries in the CHIRBASE database. Since this database is marketed to pharmaceutical industry it is mostly limited to relatively small molecules. The fact that enantiomeric discrimination of such small molecules is too weak indicates that the L-D symmetry breaking during the prebiotic evolution must have occurred at a later stage when prebiotic chiral molecules were already larger than entries in the CHIRBASE. Authors cite a paper (Ref. [48]) (Authors comment: ref. [55] in final version) reporting a linear relationship between molecule's length and the strength of enantiomeric discrimination (value of alpha). Based on this trend is it possible to predict the minimal size of prebiotic molecules that would generate sufficient symmetry breaking in the C-GARD model? Is this linear correlation also present in CHIRBASE data? From Fig. ​Fig.11 it follows that even for molecules of very modest length chiral isomers outnumber non-chiral ones. This allowed authors to disregard non-chiral isomers in their C-GARD model. I wonder, would their conclusion be qualitatively different if non-chiral isomers were added to the model. To rephrase it, do non-chiral isomers that are spared the mutually exclusive fight between their L- and D-forms get a competitive advantage over their chiral counterparts? When authors introduce their Receptor Affinity Distribution (RAD) formalism it is very easy to miss that it is *the logarithm* of affinity that follows the Poisson distribution. Only my previous interest in theories explaining log- normal distributions of dissociation constants spared me from this confusion. Authors mention that beta has a lognormal distribution in only one inconspicuous place on this page. I suggest authors explicitly mention it when introducing their GARD model and maybe even write a Poisson distribution formula for P(log(beta)). On a similar note, when introducing the Eq.(5) (Authors comment: Eq. 6 in the final version) authors describe all the variables except for mu which has to be traced back to their verbal discussion of the Poisson distribution. In Figure ​Figure44 (Authors comment: Figure ​Figure55 in the final version) the parameter sigma epsilon goes as high as 10 for lambda = 10. How it can be reconciled with the earlier requirement that sigma_epsilon < = sigma = square root of lambda? Perhaps authors mislabeled the X-axis in this figure which should read sigma? What is the functional form of the distribution of alphas from the CHIRBASE database in Figure ​Figure12?12? Is it indeed lognormal as stated in the beginning of the section "Distribution of enantiomeric discrimination"? Perhaps, in Fig. ​Fig.1212 authors can change axes to log-log (or show a log-log insert) which would let readers verify this fact?
