The manuscript reports a simple yet conclusive test of whether the variability of rates of protein evolution can be explained exclusively by the difference in their expression levels. The unequivocal answer is: "No".

This conclusion comes from comparison of the evolutionary rates of different domains within the same multi-domain protein, which obviously have identical expression levels. Authors find that while the intraprotein domain-to-domain variability of evolutionary rates (black curve in Figure 5) is dramatically reduced compared to that of the same domains in different proteins (red curve in Figure 5), it still remains considerably broader than in the null-model (green curve in Figure 5). In this null-model authors simulate the variability due to the sampling error by first reshuffling each of the alignments over the whole aligned region encompassing both domains and then recalculating the variability of the resulting homogenized domains. The fact that the null-model variability is smaller than that of the actual alignment indicates that some systematic difference in evolutionary rates of different domains still remains even when their expression levels are identical. This residual variability is tentatively attributed to domain-specific structural-functional constraints.

The null-model itself is very important and (in my view) it is not adequately explained in the text of the manuscript. Indeed, the fact that the domain-to-domain variability of evolutionary rates is considerably broader than in the null-model is one of the central observations of the manuscript. Even though the Methods section contains a more detailed description of the null-model, I feel that authors should outline it in a few sentences right where it is first mentioned in the manuscript. This description should make it clear that the alignments are reshuffled over the entire aligned region encompassing all of the domains. Such reshuffling effectively homogenizes the evolutionary rates of individual domains.

My main comment on the manuscript is regarding the claim made in the title, the abstract, and many times in the main text. Authors claim that the relative contributions of the expression level and the domain-specific structural-functional constraints to variability of evolutionary rates are *closely comparable*. If closely comparable means that, when considered separately, they reduce the variability by approximately equal factors, then it is not at all obvious from the manuscript. From Figure 5 one gets the impression that the reduction in variability when the expression level differences are taken into account is much stronger than the residual variability due to structural-functional constraints. Could authors perhaps make a more quantitative comparison of relative contributions of these two factors?

My second comment or rather a question to the authors: does taking the expression level into account explains all of the variability of *silent* substitution rates? That is what one expects if all of the residual variability visible in Figure 5 is due to structural-functional constraints.