The manuscript by Eugene Koonin describes a compelling analogy between several major evolutionary transitions in the history of life (referred to as Biological Big Bangs or BBBs) and the inflationary model describing the early dynamics of our Universe (or rather the multiverse) following the cosmological Big Bang. What conceptually unifies these two rather disparate phenomena is that both start with a chaotic phase in which a large number of new entities is rapidly created. Following a sharp crossover this phase is replaced with a much slower phase in which these entities are being tested and gradually refined. I liked the philosophical message of the manuscript that major innovations usually start with a chaotic, messy, "evolutionary brainstorming" phase in which freshly generated, still imperfect elements are being freely exchanged and recombined.

The present manuscript also nicely extends/compliments the recently published anthropic principle manifesto by the same author (Biology Direct 2, 15 (2007)).

One question I would like to see addressed in more detail is to what extent the BBBs have to involve extensive genetic recombination. In the introduction chapter of this manuscript the Cambrian explosion is listed among the greatest evolutionary transition (which it undoubtedly was). However, this evolutionary transition is later omitted from the list of BBBs discussed in detail in this manuscript. My guess this is because it does not easily fit the scenario of a rampant genetic exchange. More primitive multi-cellular organisms were in existence well before the Cambrian era and it is hard to imagine a scenario in which multi-cellular organisms would be involved in a large-scale swap of genetic material. On the other hand, it is becoming progressively more and more clear that during (or immediately before) the Cambrian explosion Nature experimented with different schemes of wiring the regulatory network for embryonic development (see e.g. the concept of regulatory "kernels" responsible for different animal body plans in E.H. Davidson, and D. H. Erwin, Science 311, 796 (2006)). Thus a more traditional explanation of the Cambrian explosion involves no rampant horizontal gene transfer but just a very rapid burst of innovation and diversification following the appearance of a new scheme for information processing (in this case represented by the regulatory network orchestrating the embryonic development).

I would very much like Eugene to share his thoughts on whether he feels that a large-scale genetic recombination is in his opinion a necessary condition for a Biological Big Bang to occur?

If it is not I could imagine extending the analogy even further to describe rapid technological transitions such as (most recently) the appearance of the Internet and the World Wide Web. Here again the singular act of invention of a new information processing tool was followed by a burst of innovation utilizing it in every imaginable way. As in any of the BBB described in the manuscript in this case the initial rapid innovative phase will inevitably be replaced by a much slower phase in which various "body plans" for Internet-based services are tested and gradually refined (or altogether discarded).