The manuscript by Jeferson Gross and Debashish Bhattacharya concerns the discussion about whether endosymbiosis of mitochondria and plastids was driven by the host or by the endosymbiont. The hope is that if we can trace the evolutionary events that transformed the free-living bacteria into organelles we can understand the original rationale for that transformation for both partners in the endosymbiosis events. What separates organelles from (intracellular) bacteria is the import and functioning in the organelle of nuclear encoded proteins, and thus the discussion focuses on the machinery that imports those proteins and its origin. Gross and Bhattacharya have recently proposed the outsiders' hypothesis, which argues that this machinery originated with nuclear encoded proteins (albeit of potentially endosymbiotic origin), and that these proteins first provided access to the outer membrane, then the intermembrane space, then the inner membrane and then the inside of the organelle. This view is in contrast with one in which the proteins encoded on the endosymbiont would have evolved to import nuclear encoded proteins, before their genes would have been transferred to the nucleus. In the latter view, at least in the paper by Alcock et al (ref. [5]), the first membrane that is decorated with new proteins during the endosymbiosis is the inner membrane, to allow the transport of metabolites that presumably would pass through existing channels in the outer membrane.

This is all a rather academic discussion as we cannot go back to the past. Furthermore most of the theoretical arguments have already been spelled out and need not to be restated by me. Finally I will not comment on the "logic" of either scenario, as evolutionary Biology to me often only makes sense in hindsight.

What is left for me to comment on are the new arguments that the authors bring to the table. I do agree that the homology of LivH with Tim23 is rather contentious, although the authors might have used a more thorough analysis than pairwise sequence similarity analysis using Blast. But, not only using pairwise sequence comparisons, but also profile-profile analysis (this referees' analysis) fail to detect any significant homology, even when the search is restricted to the putatively homologous region originally identified by Rassow et al (ref. [16]). This putative homology is often quoted, and I for one never realized that there was so little supporting evidence.

The authors' examination of the Paulinella chromatophora cyanelle as an example of what happens if the tape is played twice sounds convincing, but should include a statement that, despite all the indirect evidence in that direction, there is no documented case of protein import into P. chromatophora yet.

Finally, the authors' argument that among genes encoded on organellar genomes there are no protein sorting components is convincing at least in the sense as it shows that there is no direct evidence for a "tinkering inside" hypothesis with respect to protein transport.

Although there is a clearly observable trend of genome decay in mitochondrial genomes, I do not think that that is necessarily all there is. There are examples of nucleus to mitochondrial genome transfer, and there are many ORFs in mitochondrial genomes, e.g. in ciliates, of which the origin and potential function are unknown.
Could the authors comment on the Buchnera Daphnia symbiosis (or others with obligatory intracellular endosymbionts). There is evidence there for the sharing of amino acids. Probably the import/export machinery of amino acids requires less tinkering of proteins than the import/export of proteins, and therewith could reflect "tinkering inside". I am not suggesting that the mitochondrial carrier family is of endosymbiotic origin, but also a protein like ATM1 that is required for cytosolic FeS assembly, that exports a metabolite from the mitochondrion, and that is clearly of endosymbiotic origin, argues to consider the transport of metabolites separate from the transport of proteins.
In line with this I am a bit puzzled about the strong distinction that is made between the "tinkering from inside" and "tinkering from outside". It comes down to where (in which genome) exactly the mutations occurred that allowed the transport of cytoplasmic proteins into the mitochondrion (as stated by the authors). If the endosymbiont and the host became completely dependent upon each other before the development of a new protein import machinery, e.g. by export and import of metabolites as has been proposed for Buchnera, we are already dealing with one species, with very limited genetic heterogeneity among the endosymbionts and thus also very little possibility of adaptive evolution at that level. Thus an argument regarding the selective advantages of releasing autonomy (page 10) would no longer be valid.
The only point I would like to clarify is with respect to the reaction on my comment about nuclear-to-mitochondrial genome gene transfer. The latter has not only been observed in plant mitochondria, but also in some corals for MutS (Pont-Kingdon et al. J Mol Evol. 1998 Apr;46(4):419-31), or in some fungal mitochondria that contain an RNA polymerase containing plasmid, that at least in one case has been integrated in the mitochdrial genome (Formighieri EF et al. Mycol Res. 2008 Oct;112(Pt 10):1136-52).