The manuscript describes an elegant computational analysis of the regulatory motifs associated with the EMT transition, followed by the experimental validation that a new factor, TFAP2A, plays an important role in this process. In general I do find the first part of the paper very convincing, it computationally identifies the factor, confirms the results in independent data, and confirms binding of the factor to a predicted target. I do get a bit confused by the results of the overexpression of TFAP2A, and the arguments used to make these results consistent with the first part of the paper.

Does Fig. 1 contain the complete set of motifs that are predicted to be "differentially active" in the transition? If so, is it a coincidence that they are all connected to each other?
I am surprised by the low level of conservation between the species. Are there some motifs from e.g. human that are just below a threshold? The authors argue "The motif interaction networks derived from mouse and human EMT models suggest that only a small fraction of the TFs has a highly conserved and significant role in both species." How reliable are those species-specific predictions, and how reliable is the absence of a signal in these analyses, with these data.
If I understand the manuscript correctly, the downregulation of TFAP2A is associated with the epithelial to mesenchymal transition. Why then overexpress TFAP2A? Even is this has to do with technical limitations, I would like to see that mentioned explicitly to better understand the logic of the approach.
I find the discussion why "overexpression of TFAP2A induces changes that are similar to those occurring upon Tfap2a downregulation during EMT" lengthy and unconvincing. The authors first perform a very thorough quantitative analysis of gene expression and motif occurrence data, based on the simplifying but defendable assumptions of their linear model, confirm their findings in independent breast cancer data (Fig. 3). Then they use a large number of ad-hoc arguments to explain the inconsistencies in their results. They may all be true, but they are not convincing. Given the apparent contradictory results of the overexpression, I am surprised by the sentence "Finally, we confirm that overexpression of TFAP2A in NMuMG cells modulates epithelial plasticity and cell adhesion" in the abstract as those results do not confirm a specific hypothesis based on the results of the quantitative analysis.
In Fig. 5c there is a line connecting the various constructs. I take it this is not meant to implicate some sort of continuity? I do fully support publication once these issues have been handled.
editorial: The legend with Fig. 3 could use some work "ABasal" or "Basal A"?
TFAP2A expression was found to be less organized in breast cancer compared to normal mammary gland. - > glands
what is "substantially expressed"
It would be nice to specify which TFs of the core EMT network of ref 33 are retrieved and which are not.
"transcriptional" can often be replaced by "transcription", e.g. in "transcriptional regulation" page 18,line 20 "the interactions of the TFAP2{A,C}" appears redundant.
page 22. "in untreated NMuMG cells lead to morphological changes" -- > "led"
"an EMT signature of positively regulated genes were significantly represented" -- > "was"