Time Directed Avalanches in Invasion Models

We define forward and backward time-directed avalanches for a broad class of self-organized critical
models including invasion percolation, interface depinning, and a simple model of evolution. Although
the geometrical properties of the avalanches do not change under time reversal, their stationary state
statistical distribution does. The overall distribution of forward avalanches P(s) —s ' is superuniversal
in this class of models. The power-law exponent ~ for the distribution of distances between subsequent
active sites is derived from the properties of backward avalanches.

Since the introduction of the paradigm of self-organized
criticality (SOC) [1], there has been great interest in
and
finding universal
properties of SOC phenomena
in describing the mechanism
of self-organization [2].
Typically the evolution of SOC phenomena happens
through intermittent bursts of activity, or avalanches. The
scale free, power-law distribution of these avalanches
is a manifestation of the criticality of the process and
one of the main fingerprints of SOC. The avalanches
and their statistical properties in a broad class of SOC
models is the focus of this work. Some of the models
we consider (e.g. , invasion percolation [3]) are quite old
and familiar, while others have been introduced only
recently. The range of phenomena described by these
models is very broad. Invasion percolation describes the
displacement of immiscible f1uid in porous media. A
model proposed by Zaitsev [4] deals with low-temperature
The interface depinning model [5]
creep phenomena.
simulates the nonequilibrium
dynamics of an interface
in the presence of quenched disorder.
Finally the BakSneppen (BS) evolution model [6] may be the simplest
model of punctuated equilibrium in biological evolution.
In spite of the breadth of applications, all of these
models have similar rules of dynamics.
The simplest
version of these rules can be found in the Bak-Sneppen
model of evolution.
There, the random numbers f; are
assigned to each site i of a d-dimensional lattice. At
each time step the lowest random number in the system
is located, then the numbers at that minimal site and at
each of its 2D nearest neighbors are replaced with new
from a uniform
random numbers drawn independently
distribution
between zero and one. In the Sneppen
interface model an interface is defined by its height
h(r;) at each lattice site of the d-dimensional substrate.
The interface obeys the solid-on-solid (SOS) condition,
~h(r;) —h(r; + ek)~ ~ 1 for the heights of neighboring
columns. The uncorrelated random numbers, representing
the strength of the quenched disorder at this position of
interface, are assigned to every site (r;, h(r;)). At each
time step of the dynamics we select the minimal random
number on the interface and increase the height at this
site by one. Then the heights of neighboring sites are
advanced to recover the SOS restriction. All the interface
sites which were advanced get new uncorrelated random
numbers.
Finally, in the invasion percolation model we
again have two phases, one of which is invading another.
At each time step, one new site is connected to the cluster
of already invaded sites, namely, the one with the smallest
random number. The dynamic rules in all of these models
consist of two principal steps: (i) select globally the
current minimally stable site, which is the one with the
smallest random number; (ii) replace the number at this
site with a new random number and change the numbers
at its nearest neighbors according to particular rules,
which depend on the details of the model. We will call
models of this class invasion models. Any of the invasion
models, started in an arbitrary initial configuration, after
some transient period will reach the unique critical
stationary state. The exponents characterizing this critical
attractor and the approach to it are determined by the
exact rules of the nearest neighbor interaction. Still there
are several exponent relationships which are valid for all
of these SOC invasion models.
Avalanches can be naturally defined in the invasion
models. Their structure is slightly different from the
more traditional SOC models like, for instance, the
sandpile model [1], where the new avalanche was not
started until the previous one died out. In the invasion
models we start a new avalanche at every time step.
They form a rich hierarchical structure of avalanches
within avalanches.
Suppose that at time s the smallest
random number was fp Each of the ra. ndom numbers
changed at this time step can become smaller than fp
with probability fp
One of those with f. ;
fp must
be the overall smallest now and will be changed at the
next time step. This initiates the creation-annihilation
branching process, where the sites with f;
p play
the role of particles. While the avalanche continues to
run, there is at least one such "particle" and, therefore,
the overall minimal random number is smaller than fp
The avalanche stops when the last particle dies out.
The minimal random number at this time step must be
larger than fp. This shows how avalanches can be easily
extracted from the temporal signal of the model f;„(s),
which is the value of the selected minimal number as a
function of time s. In terms of this signal, the avalanche
of size s started at time s' is just the sequence of
activity such that
s —1) are all smaller than
(s'), but
„(s'). We will call the avalanches defined by this
rule fp-forward avalanches, where fp = f;„(s') is the
signal at the beginning of the avalanche. The branching
process picture of the avalanches suggests some of their
properties. The statistics of the avalanches depends on
the value of the branching probability fp
The . larger
it is, the larger is the expected size of an avalanche.
There must be some critical value
of the branching
probability such that the expected size of the avalanche
becomes infinite. This means that in a thermodynamic
~, and in the stationary state of the system,
limit L
there will always be at least one particle with f;
and the signal will be smaller than
at all times. In
analogy with other branching processes such as directed
percolation [7] or the propagation of the avalanche in the
Bak-Tang-Wiesenfeld sandpile model [1], we can assume
the following scaling form of the distribution P(s, fp) of
the fp-forward avalanches:

Here, r and o. are model dependent exponents and g~(x)
is some scaling function, which decays rapidly when
1 and goes to a constant when x
0. This scaling
form for invasion models has been confirmed by the
numerical simulation in [6,8 —10].
To study the properties of the signal under the time
reversal it is useful to define backward avalanches by
a similar rule. Now we look for the first f;„(s')
„(s) at times s' s. The definitions oof b oth t ypes
of avalanches are illustrated in Fig. 1. Because of the
irreversibility of the process, it is possible to have different statistical properties for the forward and backThe scaling form of the backward
ward avalanches.
avalanche distribution is given by an expression similar
to (1):

We will prove later that the cutoff divergence exponent
o. in this expression is the same as in (1), but the ri,
is different from 7-. Forward and backward avalanches
for the invasion percolation were first defined by Roux
and Guyon in [8]. The distributions
(1) and (2) give
the conditional probability to have an avalanche of size
valu off f~;„at its starting point was
that the value
s given
g
equal to fp To get the overall . distribution of forward or
backward avalanches we need to integrate (1) or (2) over
all fp in the interval [0, f, ]with a proper weig. ht, giving
= fp
the probability density to have

forward avalanche
backward avalanche
forward avalanche
backward avalanche

f;„(s) vs time s in the one-dimensional
Bak-Sneppen model. The arrows are drawn at some of the
f
biggest forward and backward avalanches in th
thee process.
Note the structure of subavalanches
roc
within the
avalanches.
FIG. 1. The si'g nal

Our main results are summarized below.
ow. Th e overa d istribution of both forward and backward avalanches
all
obeys a power law with a cutoff which depends only
on system size. The overall distribution of the forward
avalanches P~" = s
is superuniversal in all SOC invasion models. The exponent ~q" of the overall distribuThe
tion of backward avalanches is model dependent.
exponent v. b" is related to the usual avalanche exponent
r [Eq. (1)] through rl', = 3 —r. The exponent 7r of the
power-law distribution of distances between subsequent
active sites is given by 7r = 1 + (rb — 1)D = 1 + (2—
r)D, where D is a fractal dimension of the avalanche.
These relationships hold for any invasion model in any
dimension. In Table I we summarize our predictions for
the values of all exponents in three different models: twodimensional invasion percolation, (1 + 1)-dimensional inBS model of the
terface model, and one-dimensional
"evolution at the edge of chaos. "
For the statistics of the events it is not important what
was the value of f;„(s') at the initiation of the fp
branching process as long as it was larger than fp
how, this random number is immediately replaced with
a new one. Therefore, the distribution of times separating the instances when f;„(s) fp has exactly the same
The probabilstatistics as the forward fp avalanches.

This result for the Sneppen

interface

model

was first

obtained in [11].
Now we are able to get the overall distribution of
forward avalanches P~ (s). Integration of Eq. (1) with

of the two-dimensional invasion percolation (with and without self-trapping), (1 + 1)-dimensional
Sneppen interface model, and one-dimensional Bak-Sneppen model, derived from the general exponent relations. Two numbers
in the column for the invasion percolation with trapping correspond to the two definitions of the boundary of percolation cluster,
giving different fractal dimensions Db.

2D invasion
percolation

Exponents

of the models

2D invasion percolaton

(1 + 1)D Sneppen

with self-trapping

interface model

1D Bak-Sneppen model

the proper weight gives

The exponent of this distribution is superuniversal for this
class of models in any dimension.
The situation is slightly different in the case of backward avalanches. As we will show later, the distribution
of fp-backward avalanches, Pb(s, fp), has an exPonent
an additional normalization
1 and thus contains
rI,
factor I/N = 1/ I, Pb(s, fp) ds = (f, —fp)(' "l~ . Integrating Eq. (2) gives

For each SOC invasion model, there are two characteristic fractal dimensions. The first, D, is the fractal dimension of the avalanche.
It relates the volume of the
avalanche s to its characteristic spatial size r through
s = r . The other exponent, Dq, is a fractal dimension of the active boundary n& of the avalanche, i.e. , the
sites from the selection list that were changed as a reThe correlation length in these
sult of the avalanche.
models is defined as the cutoff
in the spatial size
of the fp avalanche. It diverges as fp approaches f,
fp) ". The exponents D, v, and o. are related through vD = I/o. . The values of these exponents
for the invasion models are listed in Table I.
An fp-backward avalanche is by definition a sequence
of events where f;„(s')
p,
p for 1
+ s) = fp As was hown earlier,
for the statistics
the value of f;„(s')
p is not important

We see that the exponent rq does not enter the final
1. The exponent for
expression for Pb' (s) as long as rb

the overall distribution of the backward avalanches is not
superuniversal and is related to the fp-forward avalanche
exponent 7.
In numerical simulations, the exponent r is usually
measured directly form the distribution Py(s, fp) with
the values of fp carefully fine-tuned to the threshold
. Since the backward avalanche is defined at every
time step, while Py(s, fp) gets contributions only when
fp, after the same number of time steps the
distribution Pb" has much better statistics than Py(s, fp).
It is also very convenient that Pb" naturally has no cutoff,
so one does not need to know f„ in order to measure
The measurement of Pb (s) provides a
its exponent.
very accurate way to measure r. We illustrate this in
Fig. 2 with the overall forward and backward avalanche
distributions for the one-dimensional BS model, compared
to the distribution Pf(s, fp) after the same number of
time steps. The exponent r = 1.11 ~ 0.01 derived from
the exponent rb" = 1.89 ~ 0.01 is in agreement with the
predictions of the theory proposed by Paczuski, Maslov,
and Bak [2].

of backward and forward
avalanches in the one-dimensional
Bak-Sneppen model. The
linear fits are 1.89 and 1.99, respectively.
Also shown is
P&(s, 0.644). After 4.5 X 10' time steps we have 4.5 x 10"
avalanches in each of the overall distributions but only 500
of them contribute to the P~(s, 0.644). The system size is
FIG. 2. The overall distributions

I = 1200.

The only difference in the statistics of
a given backward
from the forward
p
p avalanche
avalanche running from s' to s' + s is that value f;„(s' +
s) at the end of the process is constrained to be exactly
fp A. t the end of any forward fp avalanche of size s,
r ' =s '
sites have different random numbers than
they had before the avalanche, and any of them has an
equal chance to be equal to fp. Only the numbers at these
sites can be equal to fp, since at the beginning of the
avalanche every number was larger than fp. In terms of
the avalanche distributions this means that
Pb(s, fp) —s " Pf(s, fp).

Therefore both distributions have the same cutoff, and
their exponents obey the relation rb = r —Db/D.
As has been argued by various authors, a universal
exponent relation exists for 7- in terms of v, D, and Db..

This expression was derived for invasion percolation
models in [12], for the various interface models in
[11,13, 14], and for the BS model in [15]. From Eq. (7)
we get a particularly simple expression for 7-b..

The exponent ~ can be related to the other exponents for
a given model by considering the backward avalanches.
For invasion percolation it was first done by Roux and
Guyon in [8]. Consider a backward avalanche starting at
s and ending at s —s' ~ s. The time s —s' is the closest
moment back in time such that both r„,(s) and r„,(s —1)
belong to the avalanche started at r„,(s —s'). The radius
of this backward avalanche is r' = s"/o. It is reasonable
to assume that the activities at times s and s —1 have
equal probabilities to be anywhere within this radius from
the starting point r(s —s'). Therefore, the probability
P„„~(r rp) to have a jump bigger than r is proportional
to the probability to have a backward avalanche of size
These arguments giv. e P„„~(r„„,
bigger than ro
final expression for the exponent ~:
with the result ~ = 1 +
which was
derived for the interface model using different methods
in [14]. This expression as well as many of our previous
exponent relations disagree with the corresponding results
for invasion percolation derived by Roux and Guyon in
[8). In our opinion, the mistakes of this work derive
from several incorrect assumptions: (i) that forward and
backward avalanches have the same statistical properties,
which is not required because the process is irreversible;
(ii) that the distribution P(
fp) is uniform below
[we prove otherwise in Eq. (3)]; and (iii) that the
exponent ~ of the invasion percolation is equal to ~ —1 of
ordinary percolation [the correct relation
Eq. (7) was
first derived in [12]]. However, our predictions agree well
with the numerical simulations in [8]. For example, Roux
and Guyon measured the exponent 7-b of the overall
distribution of backward avalanches to be 1.50 ~ 0.04.
It should be compared to our prediction 7.b ' = 1.47
calculated for their version of invasion percolation.

This expression is in agreement
1 and
Since o- must be positive, this shows that ~b
confirms the validity of Eq. (5).
Equation (5) enables us to derive an expression for
another important exponent.
One can record the space
position of the current minimally stable site
(s) as a
function of time s. The distribution P, „~(r) of jumps r =
~r„,(s) — (s —1) between subsequent active sites
follows a power law,
