The genomic determinants of genotype × environment interactions in gene expression

Predicting phenotype from genotype is greatly complicated by the polygenic nature of most traits and by the complex interactions between phenotype and the environment. Here, we review recent whole-genome approaches to understand the underlying principles, mechanisms, and evolutionary impacts of genotype × environment (G×E) interactions, defined as genotype-specific phenotypic responses to different environments. There is accumulating evidence that G×E interactions are ubiquitous, accounting perhaps for the greater part of the phenotypic variation seen across genotypes. Such interactions appear to be the consequence of changes to upstream regulators as opposed to local changes to promoters. Moreover, genes are not equally likely to exhibit G×E interactions; promoter architecture, expression level, regulatory complexity, and essentiality correlate with the differential regulation of a gene by the environment. One implication of this correlation is that expression variation across genotypes alone could be used as a proxy for G×E interactions in those experimental cases where identifying environmental variation is costly or impossible.

From single traits to a whole-genome perspective
Although the genotype of an individual is now straightforward to determine, our inability to predict its phenotype has never been more self-evident. Tremendous progress has been made resolving certain well-studied traits at the molecular level 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13; however, an understanding of the specification of complex traits is generally lacking [14]. Much of this complexity results from the phenotype being a convolution of the genotype and the specific environment experienced by the organism. In this review, we discuss the occurrence of G×E interactions. Here, we first describe the classical and latest methods for identifying these in the population, before turning to emerging principles regarding their appearance. We next discuss the mechanisms that create G×E interactions within the framework of local and distant genetic changes. Finally, we examine the implications of G×E interactions for the development and evolution of species, and provide an outlook for future research on this topic.

When a single trait is examined between two genotypes and two environments, the trait might be constant across all combinations or it might be affected in several possible ways (Figure 1). First, the manifestation of the trait could differ between the genotypes but be unaffected by the environmental changes (Figure 1D). Second, the expression of the trait may be affected by a particular environment, but identically so across the genotypes (Figure 1E). Third, the appearance of the trait might change across both genotypes and environments, but the nature of this change might be additive (genotypic and environmental variation, Figure 1F). Finally, often the environment affects the phenotype in a complicated manner that is not an additive effect of the genotype. Such a genotype-specific phenotypic response to different environments is called a G×E interaction. A G×E interaction may manifest, for example, from a genotypic change between the strains underlying a change in phenotype in only one of the environments (Figure 1A). Alternatively, an environment may have opposing effects across genotypes (Figure 1B). Beyond discrete environments, G×E interactions may also be examined as a function of continuous environments 15, 16, 17. These kinds of G×E interaction represent a considerable challenge for cracking the genotypic code that produces them.

Traditionally, studies of G×E interactions have focused upon individual phenotypic traits, which often include life-history traits, such as body size and longevity 2, 4, 5, 6, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. To map the genetic loci responsible for the particular G×E interaction, multiple loci in the genome are typically screened. Such quantitative trait locus (QTL) analyses are based on the comparison of the appearance of a trait across recombinant inbred lines (RIL) derived from a cross of two parental strains differing in that trait (Figure 2A)18, 25. This approach was recently successfully used to explore the effect of low temperature on the body size of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans[2]. The laboratory strain was 33% bigger at lower temperatures; however, in a second strain, body size was unaffected (such as the scenario indicated in Figure 1A). Using QTL analysis, the researchers found that a specific single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in tra-3, which encodes a calpain-like protease, accounted for the differential response. This QTL approach to identify the genetic basis of G×E interactions has been remarkably fruitful for many traits 2, 5, 18, 20, 22, 23, 24.

G×E interactions are extremely common [26] and are observed even when examining a single trait. In an early study examining bristle numbers in Drosophila across a set of RILs and environments (temperature and sexual environment), 14 out of the 92 examined markers showed significant G×E interactions, a remarkably high level [23]. More recently, a study queried for G×E interactions in the risk for breast cancer between 23 alleles and ten environmental factors. Examining data from over 70 000 individuals, significant G×E interactions were detected for breast cancer rates for a lymphocyte-specific protein 1 (LSP1) allele and the number of births, and a caspase 8 (CASP8) allele and alcohol consumption [27].

High-throughput techniques have greatly expanded the depth in which traits can be analyzed in terms of the effects of the genotype and the environment, and now promise to reveal generalized principles. For example, using RNA-Seq, tens of thousands of traits in the form of gene expression levels can be simultaneously examined. The first study of global gene expression measurements coupled with linkage analysis demonstrated the power of such an approach, called eQTL analysis (Figure 2A), in unmasking the overall complexity of gene expression variation [25], leading to a shift in the research of gene expression evolution and regulation [28]. This study determined the linkage between expression levels of 6215 genes and 3312 genomic markers in two parental yeast strains and 40 RILs. The analysis revealed that variation in gene expression was associated with cis-effects, although a small number of trans-effects impacted multiple genes. Later analyses also included different environments in the approach and identified G×E interactions [29]. A shortcoming of this method, however, is the reliance upon RILs, which are labor intensive to construct. Moreover, mapping in the QTL approach can be of limited resolution depending upon the markers used.

A modified approach has been recently introduced to map the effects of G×E interactions on gene expression [30]. Gene expression was monitored across a population of individuals and conditions (environments), followed by whole-genome sequencing to identify each genotype (Figure 2B). This method is akin to genome-wide association studies (GWAS), in which expression is also monitored. The crucial advantage of a ‘global’ GWAS across genotypes and environments over the eQTL approach is that the experimental design is simpler because RILs are not required. Furthermore, with the ever-decreasing prices of high-throughput sequencing, large-scale genotyping is now readily feasible. The importance of a ‘global’ GWAS approach when exploring the effect of genetic and environmental components on gene expression has also been advocated in a recent review [31]. This approach can also be applied to sexual organisms with unique individuals by examining different conditions, such as drug-response, in cell cultures derived from noninvasively acquired tissue samples.

A genomic bias for G×E interactions
The application of genomics and transcriptomics to different species has begun to unravel the principles underlying interactions between genotype and environment. Comparative gene expression studies have revealed that expression divergence between different species is highly variable for different gene classes 32, 33, 34. For example, homeodomain transcription factors are more conserved in their embryonic expression profiles across species than are olfactory receptor genes [33]. Interestingly, the level of divergence in gene expression in yeast is correlated with responsiveness to environmental changes (in other words, the degree to which the expression is induced across conditions such as heat or low pH) [35]. Moreover, it was demonstrated in yeast that genes with high expression divergence shared a distinct promoter architecture 35, 36. Such genes tended to lack a nucleosome-free region in their proximal promoters and had a TATA-box 35, 36. Both of these promoter elements are also associated with nonessential genes (i.e., genes not required for growth in optimal conditions [37]) and stress-responsive genes [35]. These studies in yeast suggest that genotypic variation is correlated with environmental responsiveness and is, at least partly, encoded in the promoter sequence of a gene.

The expression levels of genes displaying G×E interactions vary, by definition, across both environments and genotypes. Thus, the underlying genomic mechanism for G×E interactions may naturally be the same as those for generating genotypic or environmental variation. Accordingly, we expect that the group of genes with G×E interactions contains the same biases (such as nonessentiality) found in the group of genes with high expression divergences across species. Support for this notion came from a comparison of gene expression across six strains of Saccharomyces cerevisiae grown under four distinct environments [38]. Genes that exhibited G×E interactions were indeed biased for nonessentiality. This is in agreement with another study in yeast showing that genes characterized by genotypic variation were enriched for nonessential genes [35]. The yeast intraspecies comparison also revealed that, despite being nonessential, genes with G×E interactions did not exhibit signs of faster evolution or weaker selective constraints at the protein level [38], recapitulating a similar result from studies into expression divergence in yeast, Drosophila, and nematodes 39, 40, 41. In addition, genes with G×E interactions in yeast were also enriched for gene duplicates and depleted for low levels of expression [38]. Taken together, these findings suggest that the genes displaying G×E interactions show similar characteristics to genes exhibiting genotypic variation.

Another similarity is the finding that genes with G×E interactions have distinct promoter architecture. A recent study in C. elegans demonstrated that genes with a particular promoter architecture were disproportionally likely to display G×E interactions [30] (Figure 3). Notably, C. elegans genes with G×E interactions tended to have long promoters with a high concentration of regulatory motifs [30]. However, these characteristics distinguish genes with G×E interactions from other gene classes. Notably, although genes marked by genotypic variation also had significantly longer promoter sequences compared with the average gene (although not as long as genes with G×E interactions), they showed a smaller density of regulatory motifs [30]. Furthermore, the proximal promoters of genes with G×E interactions exhibited higher average nucleosome occupancy than those of other gene groups [30]. Thus, G×E interactions are not simply a subset of genotypic variation, but truly a unique class of interactions.

In addition to their unique promoter architecture, genes with G×E interactions are also characterized by a distinct mid-range level of expression, neither ubiquitously high nor low, suggesting that the mid-range expression level is the most susceptible to genotypic and environmental changes [30]. This result is in agreement with the observation that, in yeast, genes with G×E interactions were not expressed at low levels [38]. Many of these properties that distinguish genes with G×E interactions are also characteristic of genes that are tightly regulated [42]. These unique characteristics of genes with G×E interactions relative to genes displaying genotypic or environmental variation suggests that the underlying principles governing G×E interactions genes are not simply the combination of factors influencing genotypic and environmental variation [30].

To better understand how a gene with a G×E interaction differs from a gene displaying genotypic or environmental variation, it is worth asking how a G×E interaction originates. One study that looked at this examined how transcription factor (TF) binding to conserved Saccharomyces cis-elements differed across environmental conditions [43]. The authors found that TF binding was generally highly dependent upon the environment; for example, Gcn4 bound the ASN1 promoter in some conditions, but not in others [43]. Such condition-dependent regulation suggests that a common mechanism for the generation of a G×E interaction is a mutation to a condition-dependent cis site, leading to gene expression changes manifested as a G×E interaction when yeast are exposed to the corresponding set of conditions [38]. This notion is consistent with the pattern of G×E interactions in C. elegans. The promoter architecture of a gene with a G×E interaction, including a long promoter and a high concentration of cis elements, indicates a highly regulated gene [30]. Thus, highly regulated genes are expected to be more easily disposed to form G×E interactions because they contain more cis elements. This prediction is supported by a subsequent study that found a positive correlation between the level of gene expression variation across multiple environments and the number of TFs involved in its regulation [42]. A recent study in the sea urchin, however, provided evidence that G×E interactions may be limited to genes involved in the regulatory network underlying development [44]. Interestingly, the perturbation of the network genes did not affect the expression of the target genes, suggesting that the appearance of G×E interactions is prevented by an effective buffering mechanism against temperature changes [44]. Similar robustness to environmental variation between different genotypes was also observed in a human study comparing the blood transcriptomes of Amazigh and Arab populations living in rural and urban locations in Morocco [45]. However, the possibility remains that, in these populations, G×E interactions with minor effects are still be present. Collectively, these studies provide a starting point for understanding the disposition of some genes over others to exhibit G×E interactions.

Interaction at a distance
It is clear from studying the genetic architecture of genes with G×E interactions that they are constrained in some way and limited to a specific subset of genes; thus, identifying G×E interactions may reveal interesting biological principles about adaptation at the level of the genome. All evolutionary changes in gene expression may be regarded as the consequence of two principal types of genetic effect: cis changes, comprising mutations to the gene sequence or its proximal regulatory elements, and trans changes, comprising mutations to upstream regulators (Figure 4). This classification primarily reflects the molecular distinctions in the mechanism leading to the change of expression, rather than the positional effects relative to the gene sequence, because multiple examples of distant cis effects and proximal trans effects have been described [14].

Studies of the global evolution of gene expression have used QTL analysis to gain insights into the mechanisms underlying changes in gene expression 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54. Because this method addresses regulatory changes indirectly by identifying the position of the associated regulatory locus relative to the gene of interest, the terms ‘local’ and ‘distant’ are more apt than cis and trans, as has been previously suggested [14]. One should bear in mind, however, that these could be used interchangeably for most of the genes. When gene expression was compared across different strains and species of Drosophila, it became evident that the relative prominence of local and distant effects on gene expression divergence depended upon the evolutionary distance between the examined organisms 55, 56. Local changes accounted for the dominant part of gene expression divergence across different Drosophila species, whereas distant changes were more common across different strains of the same fly species 55, 56. The difference in frequency of these two types of change may be a consequence of stronger purifying selection against distant changes; thus explaining their commonness on only short evolutionary timescales [56]. Consistently, in C. elegans, the majority of genes involved in G×E interactions were also found to be associated with distant QTLs [29]. Moreover, in yeast, the amount of local changes linked to genes with G×E interactions was significantly smaller than that for genes with genotypic or environmental variation [57]. Thus, genes with G×E interactions are distinguished from other gene groups by their disproportionally high association with distant-acting loci. This observation is in agreement with results demonstrating the highly regulated nature of genes with G×E interactions 30, 38, 42.

Why should there be more G×E interactions owing to distant rather than local effects? The notion of a gene regulatory network is key to understanding this effect. Consider a network of genes where the regulation of each gene is dependent upon both its own promoter and the precise regulation of all upstream factors (Figure 4). A mutation altering the regulation of an important regulator will affect not only itself, but also its downstream genes. Housekeeping genes and genes with simple modes of regulation have a shallow regulatory network and, thus, mutations influencing their regulation are biased towards cis (local) changes (Figure 4). However, genes under complex modes of regulation may be influenced at many loci, most of them distant (Figure 4). Thus, the higher frequency of distant changes associated with highly regulated genes may reflect the gene network architecture in which there are more sites at which trans rather than cis mutations could occur in genes with a high level of regulation (Figure 4). In other words, a single cis mutation in a TF may lead to many trans changes in each of its targets (Figure 4, bottom right). Thus, a more complicated genetic network would lead to more opportunities for a mutation to lead to a change that manifests differently depending on both the genetic background and environmental condition in which it is expressed. Given that the gene regulatory network evolves by the incorporation of additional genes and regulatory links, it is likely that its more ancient and, consequently, more connected gene components are enriched for G×E interactions. Once more genotypes have been examined, it should be further possible to investigate to what degree eQTLs indeed correspond to TFs.

Interestingly, genes affected by distant changes tend to be expressed in a condition-specific manner 57, 58, 59. Thus, for these genes, G×E interactions occur as a simple consequence of a distant change to their regulator. In the previous section, we discussed G×E interactions occurring by a change to a cis element, whereas here we have stressed the dominant effect of an upstream distant change. An additional piece of evidence, supporting the role of trans changes, comes from a C. elegans study [30]. Genes with G×E interactions are not independent but rather group into functional sets. For example, targets of the defective P granules and sterile family member 1 (deps-1) gene show co-regulatory changes, suggesting that one change led to the changes in the entire group [30]. If G×E interactions mainly resulted from local changes, such a pattern would not be expected to be as evident, with the exception of cases in which adaptations can lead to the rewiring at the cis level [60].

G×E interactions in evolution and development
Phenotypic plasticity provides an organism with the flexibility to adjust its phenotype with respect to the specific environmental conditions experienced 61, 62. Such plasticity represents a substantial advantage in unpredictable environments. However, there is often significant variation in the levels of phenotypic plasticity across different genotypes owing to G×E interactions 22, 29. For example, a considerable difference was found between two strains of C. elegans in the phenotypic plasticity of life-history traits (egg size, fertility, and growth rate) in response to low (12 °C) and normal (24 °C) temperatures [5].

It has been proposed that, in particular situations, the appearance of some of the environmentally inducible phenotypes could become genetically fixed and independent of the environmental stimuli [63]. This may occur when an organism is continuously exposed to a condition eliciting a specific phenotypic response, and a selective advantage is present for its constitutive expression [63]. Such ‘canalization’ was originally introduced by Waddington in 1942 [64] following the appearance of a cross-vein in the Drosophila wing. Initially, the cross-vein appeared only upon exposure to alcohol, but after several generations of constant exposure it appeared even in the absence of the alcohol. Such a transition of an originally environmentally induced phenotype to genetic control is termed ‘genetic assimilation’ [63]. Thus, genetic assimilation is intrinsically manifested as variation across both genotypes and environments.

Despite the long history of the concept of genetic assimilation and the multiple examples described for individual traits 65, 66, 67, it remains a controversial topic in evolutionary biology [68]. The importance and scope of genetic assimilation in the evolution of novelty by phenotypic plasticity currently remains unknown. One hypothesis is that a G×E interaction provides the necessary genetic variation for the agency of genetic assimilation. The application of systems-level approaches in gene expression evolution and interaction studies now promises to provide sufficient data to address this ongoing debate. One study, relevant to the issue of genetic assimilation at the molecular level, reported numerous cases of transitions in gene expression between constitutive and inducible gene expression states across yeast species subjected to different stress conditions [59]. The mechanism of such transitions and their evolutionary implications are further discussed in [69]. A G×E interaction may provide the raw material necessary for genetic assimilation. However, the change to constitutive expression generally occurs by local mutations 57, 58. As discussed above, G×E interactions appear to typically arise from distant, not local, changes and, consequently, the changes observed in this study may be atypical of G×E interactions. A study in C. elegans found no evidence for genetic assimilation after comparing the gene expression profiles of two strains grown under different temperatures [29]. Thus, there is currently little evidence that G×E interactions lead to genetic assimilation; however, further exploration of the relation may be an interesting avenue of research.

Finally, in a recent review, a hypothesis was set forth arguing that the stages comprising the life cycle of an animal may have evolved by genetic assimilation from a set of alternative environmentally triggered phenotypes [70]. There have also been suggestions that developmental phenotypic plasticity has important implications for the evolution of novelty, which have also been recently reviewed 69, 71. Testing this hypothesis requires a combination of evolutionary and developmental biology, comparative genomics, and global gene expression analysis across different environments, and initial steps have been made in this direction 33, 72, 73, 74, 75. For example, several studies used a similar method to the approach shown in Figure 2B to look at gene expression divergence in C. elegans across different genotypes and developmental stages and found a significant number of genotype-by-stage interactions 76, 77, 78. These early results demonstrate the utility in widening the scope of G×E interactions to examine developmental stages as different ‘environments’ towards an understanding the role phenotypic plasticity in the evolution and development of metazoans.

Concluding remarks
Despite the impressive progress in our understanding of G×E interactions, much remains elusive. The central challenge may be framed as understanding how a specific genomic change leads to environmental-specific phenotypes; being able to predict these changes will have a significant impact in certain fields (Box 1). The progress towards this goal described here has been made using whole-genome approaches that simultaneously monitor the effects of a polymorphism on thousands of genomic loci, offering a glimpse of a unified picture of what modes of change are probable. Given the dominant role that distant changes play in the introduction of G×E interactions, it is evident that understanding the underlying gene regulatory networks in detail is crucial 79, 80. In particular, it will be important to establish regulatory relations in different environmental conditions. With sufficiently resolved models of the regulatory relations among genes, the regulatory genome 79, 80, we may well be in a better position to understand and predict G×E interactions. These models must further carefully treat expression measurements by appropriate consideration of the stochastic component of expression.

The global genotype-wide and environment-wide association method (Figure 2B) holds great power in searching for G×E interactions. Recent advances in transcriptomics may further this approach, enabling a more comprehensive search, as well as revealing the role of G×E interactions in cellular and developmental processes. Most of the studies reviewed here each examined gene expression in samples of hundreds of cells or more, thereby monitoring a kind of composite of different cell types across a mix of developmental stages. More recently, gene expression time-courses have been revealed across developmental time for many organisms 33, 72, 73, 81, 82, 83. However, even gene expression across time is imprecise because it does not specify the particular cell type within the organism in which the gene is expressed. An examination of an animal at the single-cell level, with a transcriptomic method, will enable the mapping of the expression level of each gene across both time and space (position within an organism). Thus, some G×E interactions in gene regulation may only be detectable at particular regions of the animal at particular stages. One example of this is the Allen Brain Atlas, which has cataloged the transcriptomics of over 200 regions of the human brain in two individuals [84]. Although this data set lacks a temporal component, it is incredibly useful for large-scale analyses. However, the fourth dimensional required for analysis is the environment (genome × environment × space × time), which promises to enable the identification of G×E interactions across both space and time. Such an analysis will be able to query how different cell types at different developmental stages respond to G×E interactions, potentially illuminating the evolutionary trajectory of G×E interactions. For example, which G×E interactions occur during the nematode larval stage? Answering this question may enable a molecular understanding of why some nematodes undergo a dauer stage whereas others pass through a parasitic instar stage at the same place in the life cycle [70]. Although such analysis may not be currently feasible for complex organisms, it might be possible for model organisms, such as C. elegans, that have a tractable number of cells [85]. Although seemingly outlandish at present [86], we will know we have understood G×E interactions when we can explain the phenotype under a particular environment from the genome alone.


