Panchin et al. propose the SCANDAL hypothesis under which certain groups of secondarily simplified animals, in particular, Myxosporea, evolved from transmissible cancers. The hypothesis is both obvious enough - after all, the transmissible tumors are a step ahead of metastases on the path of tumor autonomization, and it is natural to speculate on the next step - and scandalous enough which, I suppose, is a good feature for a hypothesis. The discussion in the article is well informed, with respect to both transmissible tumors and animal evolution, and interesting. The authors make a laudable attempt to render the hypothesis falsifiable by postulating that any serious candidates for the origin from trnasmissible tumors should have lost a substantial fraction of tumor suppressors and apoptosis effectors. This is a (overly?) stringent criterion because there are many pathways to cancer, not necessarily through currently known “cancer genes”, and many ways to impair apoptosis as well. So, in a sense, this amounts to searching under the streetlight, but I think the approach is appropriate as a strong selection criterion for dismissing SCANDAL candidate. Indeed, by applying it, the authors discard 3 of the 4 initially suggested groups, and zero in on Myxosporea that have indeed lost quite a few of the genes of interest. As the authors admit, this cannot be really considered “support” for the hypothesis, only observations that appear compatible with it. Again, as the authors rightly note, the loss of these genes seems to be part of the general trend of reductive evolution, with no evidence that it was selective with respect to the cancer-related genes. My main question is very simple: do Cnidaria have cancer? If so, even if transmissibility has not been demonstrated, then, the origin of Myxosporea from a tumor would appear a distinct possibility. If not, the entire scenario is entirely speculative. On the whole, I tend to think that the hypothesis is wrong, and there is no SCANDAL in the animal kingdom. However, the possibility that there is definitely merits discussion, so the article will be of interest to many and could stimulate new insight and actual new research.