The authors of this manuscript present a striking hypothesis, that the interactions between the human host and the microbiome make a substantial contribution to religious behavior. The idea is certainly interesting and much of the article makes for engaging reading. Nevertheless, the present manuscript includes gaps in logic and major weaknesses that compel me to conclude that at the present stage, the idea is sheer, unfounded speculation not a legitimate hypothesis.

I see two fundamental problems with the current narrative. First, although it goes beyond doubt that many parasite can and do alter the behavior of the host organism, the authors do not show a shred of evidence of a specific association between the human microbiome and religion. Surely, religious rituals can and do lead to spread of infections, and so do any other social interactions. Thus, following the author’s logic, one could speculate microbiome-drive evolution of animal sociality in general not religion in particular especially given that non-human animals do not appear to have religion but certainly suffer from parasites and epizootics. However, even that, more logically consistent and less outrageous hypothesis would be the worst kind of adaptationist just so story. There is any number of evolutionary factors behind the evolution of sociality, with the benefits for parasite being only a side effect. The second, even more damning problem is the very notion of “brain microbiome”. I am concerned that all the microbial sequences detected by the authors in brain samples are contaminations. In general, apart from obvious pathologies, brain is a sterile area. The authors are well aware of these weaknesses and of the existence of the blood–brain barrier, and yet, choose to present these findings as some kind of support for their hypothesis.

From my point of view, publication of the current or cosmetically modified version of this manuscript would benefit neither the authors nor the journal. On the bright side, the authors write in a lively, engaging style, especially in the background section. The effects of the microbiome (primarily, the all-important gut microbiome not the imaginary microbiome of the brain) on animal (including human) behavior are certainly of major interest, My suggestion is that this manuscript is thoroughly reworked into a review of this subject. Then, perhaps, it might be appropriate to mention, if only in passing, that the microbiome could affect even such distinctly human activities as religious behavior.