Toms and Barrangou report bulk statistics on CRISPR arrays for class I CRISPR-Cas systems. Although the paper as such does not report genuine biological insights, these are useful data, and as the authors point out at the end of the Abstract, it is a step towards creating an analytical framework for quantitative analysis of CRISPR arrays. Thus, overall, this is useful work. However, I do have certain concerns regarding the methods, conclusions and presentation that are detailed below.

My principal concern is quite technical. Clearly, any statistics over large collections of genomes can be significantly biased, to the point of being meaningless, by the effects of non-independence in the data. Because all genomes are connected by a tree, whereas genome sequencing so far had been strongly non-random, with numerous strains sequenced for only a few species and many species for only a few genera, this is a serious concern in microbial genomics.

Granted, CRISPR-cas loci are highly variable, even between closely related isolates, so the problem in this case could be less severe than in others. Still, I think it is important for this kind of analysis to be clear about the way non-independence between genomes was taken into account or why it is unimportant if it was not. The significance and even validity of all results could be affected by this source of bias.

Along the same lines but more with respect to presentation: I think the data, i.e. the genomes that were analyzed (or not analyzed) have to be described explicitly.

Turning now to the results of this work, I can accept that geometric distribution is a better fit for the distribution of array lengths than Poisson distribution. It is not entirely clear for me why a discrete distribution was chosen in the first place (‘visual’ impression of the data is hardly a strong argument). Then, I have to admit that I am not sure I can make any conclusions from the observation that the geometric distribution wins over Poisson. The authors do not offer any insightful ideas on this, and I am afraid that would be difficult to do. Generally, I believe that such a straightforward comparison is not a particularly informative way to analyze distributions of CRISPR array lengths (or any other genomic features). It would be much more satisfying to examine different mathematical models of array growth (different variants of birth-and-death models, I think) and then fit different functions. In that manner, we might have some biological insights. The way the results are presented in the paper, we do not.

The apparent non-randomness of the CRISPR loci distribution on the chromosomes is a potentially interesting observation. Again, however, the authors offer no biological interpretation. Any speculation at all?

There are pertinent questions that (I think) could have been easily addressed in this work, but currently are not. Why analyze Class 1 only? I think quantitative comparison with Class 2 would be interesting. If there is a good reason not to do it, better to explain.

Similarly, are the differences in array lengths and distributions between types and subtypes significant? From the numbers in Table ​Table1,1, it looks like some could be. If so, it would useful to assess statistically and then, perhaps, consider the biological underpinnings.