This is an interesting Hypothesis paper that interprets the pervasive horizontal gene transfer (HGT) in prokaryotes as a "simple but necessary consequence" of their apparent genome size constraints and the "underlying expansion dynamics of their genome through gene duplication-divergence evolution". In itself, this is a straightforward, sound, and yet, interesting idea. To my knowledge, this point has never been explicitly discussed before which I find surprising. Indeed, if there is a tight size constraint, and at the same time, a characteristic rate of gene duplication, there also should be some force to maintain and restore functional diversity, especially, in the context of a community genome, and HGT is the best and obvious candidate. I think theoretical work that shows the possibility of long-time persistence of genes acquired via HGT, even in the absence of measurable selective advantage is relevant here:

Novozhilov et al. Mathematical modeling of evolution of horizontally transferred genes. MBE 2005; 22: 1721-1732 Moreover, I suspect that the hypothesis discussed in this paper in itself provides for fairly straightforward mathematical modeling - perhaps, not for this paper but I think it would be interesting to do.

This being said, I am not sure that I find the section on "testing of the hypothesis" particularly illuminating or even genuinely relevant. The connection between network topology and HGT escapes me. At the very least, it would be helpful to explain this in more explicit terms. I also find the section on implications of the hypothesis rather vague and do not believe that the excursion into the raisond' etre of eukaryotes is particularly helpful. A more careful and concrete discussion of the evolution of prokaryotes themselves would do more for the exposition of the authors' hypothesis.

My further misgivings about this and similar papers are not even criticisms but more philosophical musings about the status of "Why?" questions in biology. This paper tries to address that very sort of question: why so much HGT among prokaryotes? Answers can be given at a number of different levels, and Isambert and Stein offer one of them, a very interesting one, rooted in constraints and features of genome evolution. But one can also easily argue that prokaryotes, basically, do it so often because they can, having no separation of germline and soma, and possessing specific pumps for DNA intake, essentially, as food not "for the purpose" of HGT.

More broadly, one could argue that HGT, or put another way, mixing and matching of genetic elements is the primary mode of life existence that does not call for an explanation (this is, in a slightly caricatured form, the view propounded in ref. [3]) whereas everything that deviates from that modality, certainly, eukaryotes, but to some extent, any cellular life forms, needs to be explained. This is not so much criticism of the present paper but rather a series of general thoughts on the epistemology of evolutionary biology. Along these lines, the paper is not really a Hypothesis, at least, not in the strict Popperian sense, but rather a viewpoint. This somewhat skeptical position that I take does not render the paper uninteresting or useless.

Minor comment:

p. 3, left: I suggest not lumping viruses and viroids with prokaryotes when considering genome size constraints. I would limit this discussion to cellular life forms in which case a lower limit does seem to exist, although the discovery of tiny endosymbionts like Carsonella pushes this limit surprisingly low.