This straightforward phylogenetic study of Phenylalanine Ammonia Lyase (PAL), the first committed enzyme of the phenylpropanoid pathway, reveals the monophyly of PALs from land plants and dikaryal fungi, with this eukaryotic branch embedded with a highly diverse bacterial tree. The interpretation of this result favored by the authors is that the ancestor of dikaryal fungi acquired the PAL gene from a soil bacterium and passed the gene to the ancestor of land plants. This conclusion implies a key role of HGT in the land colonization by plants.

I think this study highlights both the huge advantages and the considerable headaches that are associated with having numerous genome sequences from all walks of life. The conclusion made by the authors is, of course, interesting and plausible but it is by no means the only one that is possible to make from the tree shown in Figure ​Figure2.2. The main problem, as with most scenarios that involve HGT, is that we do not know the relative likelihoods of HGT and gene loss (but we do know that gene loss in many eukaryotic lineages was extensive). Therefore, arguments for HGT are doomed to remain mostly qualitative and often less than conclusive. With this in mind, potential alternative scenarios for PAL include (but are not necessarily limited to): i) presence in the last common ancestor of the extant eukaryotes with subsequent loss in all lineages (with sequenced genomes) except for land plants and dikaryal fungi; the authors briefly discuss this possibility and dismiss it as unlikely, and generally, one tends to agree (the number of required losses is quite large) but just how unlikely this possibility is, is still hard to tell;

ii) HGT from the chloroplast to the common ancestor of all Plantae, with subsequent loss in algae, followed by HGT to dikaryal fungi; in the manuscript, this scenario is also dismissed as a highly unlikely one but, in this case, I am not sure I agree as the bacterial sister group of the eukaryotic PALs does include some cyanobacteria, and a loss of the gene in 2–3 algal lineages is not unlikely;

iii) independent HGTs from related (soil) bacterial to plants and fungi – a possibility that is not discussed in the manuscript but that, as far as I see, cannot be ruled out.

The above alternatives to the authors' conclusion do not invalidate the work but it must be admitted that, e.g., the chloroplast scenario is less surprising than the one presented by the authors, so much so that the advisability of dedicating a special papers to the origin of PAL in plants and fungi could be questioned. My disappointment with the manuscript is that the authors do not investigate the phylogeny of other enzymes of the phenylpropanoid pathway. Had this been done and had a coherent pattern been discovered, the conclusions could be much more convincing and exciting. If, on the other hand, such a coherent pattern does not exist, this also would be notable indicating that, like many other systems, this key pathway is a patchwork of genes of different origins. I understand, of course, that such a complete phylogenetic analysis requires a considerable amount of extra work, so the authors might prefer to highlight the PAL analysis separately, but I still think that a more comprehensive paper will be of greater value.

At a more technical level, I think that it is highly desirable to also include result from a maximum likelihood analysis to buttress those obtained with the superoptimistic MrBayes. With just one family to analyze, this will not take too much effort.