In this article, Bernhardt and Tate consider an important matter, often ignored in discussions of the plausibility of the RNA world hypothesis - the chemical environment most favourable to such a scenario. Based on an informative review of available biochemical literature, they argue that the RNA world, if it existed, would have been most favourable at acidic pH. They also note that peptide bonds -- but not DNA -- are optimally stable at acidic pH, suggesting that scenarios for early evolution where a physical environment is invoked should include consideration of this fact. The authors go on to argue that an acidic Hadean ocean, but not the more alkaline environments of Lost City, would be favourable to the emergence of an RNA world.

I think the authors are onto something here, but it would have been good to have seen some broader discussion on the possible environment. I am not sure that synthesis (as opposed to degradation) in the ocean is expected - if the authors believe it is, this is an important point that needs to be integrated into discussion. In this respect, I would be interested to hear the authors' thoughts on the recent proposal for pumice as a possible site for the origin of life [69]. This seems broadly compatible with the authors' suggestion, and has the advantage of not requiring the origin of life in an ocean environment where degradation might prevail over syntheses.

I do overall think the case made by the authors is an important one, and deserving of further consideration, but I do wonder about one or two of the arguments. For instance, the statement in reference to the Järvinen paper [10] on p6 is a little surprising - here it is pointed out that phosphodiester bond hydrolysis of dinucleosides is lowest at pH 4-5 at 90°C, within the temperature range of the Hadean ocean. What worries me about this is that such temperatures do not seem particularly compatible with functioning RNA. Here the relevant property is not the conditions under which phosphodiester bond hydrolysis occurs but the conditions under which tertiary structure (and by proxy, RNA function) is stable. Given that tertiary structure is not known to be stable at such high temperatures, even in thermostable ribozymes [73], I suspect a much lower temperature would have been necessary for an RNA world. This might not be incompatible with the general conclusions drawn by the authors regarding an acidic environment for an RNA world -- some more careful consideration on the relationship to temperature might be valuable here: specifically, how much does lowering pH improve tertiary structure stability of RNAs?

Another case where a clearer argument on temperature could be made is in reference to ancestral reconstruction of thioredoxin enzymes, EF-Tu, and the discussion of protein enzymes from A. aceti that are thermostable and resistant to acidic pH (p11). These comparisons are weak, partly because such ancestral reconstruction is likely to be difficult, but mostly because, signal or no signal, they focus on protein, whereas the period the authors are looking at surely predates such proteins. In this respect, the work of Gouy and colleagues [76,77] may be more relevant; those authors looked at GC content of rRNA as a means of estimating the temperatures in which the Last Universal Common Ancestor existed. This work suggests a moderate temperature, though again -- and this is relevant to both protein and RNA ancestral reconstruction -- it is not possible to go further back than this hypothetical point, so, technical issues aside, it is difficult to say if this work sheds direct light on optimal temperature in an RNA world. Indeed, this point was made by Arrhenius and colleagues [78] in a letter that sought to correct a journalistic misinterpretation of Galtier and colleagues' work.

I was intrigued by the discussion on p17 regarding the potential impact of an acidic cellular environment on protonated base pairs in tRNA from A. aceti, which is certainly an interesting line of enquiry. However, I was a bit surprised at how the paper ends - it seems rather abrupt, and lacks some concluding remarks or synthesis. I think adding a final conclusions-type section would greatly enhance readability.

Minor issues.

On p5 of the manuscript I think the reference numbering is out - reference 12 looks incorrect.
