The work presented here makes an interesting case for the existence of compartmentation early in evolution, based on the presence of volutin granules/acidocalcisomes in all three domains of life. The authors present data indicating that vacuolar pyrophosphatases are found in all three domains of life, and interpret this as consistent with their conjecture that acidocalcisomes predate the divergence of the three domains. It is clear that the phylogeny of vacuolar pyrophosphatases cannot be used to strongly argue for presence of this gene in the LUCA, partly because of poor resolution in the dataset, and partly because of unambiguous evidence for horizontal gene transfer within the dataset. While there are some clear cases of late transfers in their phylogeny, it is harder to establish events deeper in the tree. Mapping the domain architecture of PF03030 onto this tree does not obviously strengthen the evidence, though it is striking to note the high level of conservation of the domain itself.

While it certainly seems reasonable to expect that a complex organelle may only have arisen once in evolution (meaning acidocalcisomes should be considered ancient), such expectation is not evidence in itself. In further testing this conjecture, it will therefore be interesting to identify a broader set of common signature proteins associated with this organelle, and examine their evolutionary histories. In addition, examining whether patterns of gain and loss of both the organelles and key associated proteins can be ascertained using more detailed phylogenies and character analyses within a phylogenetic framework (as was successfully demonstrated for hydrogenosomes - see Embley et al. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B (2003) 358, 191-203) will provide an important means of testing the conjecture presented here.

The following major claims are made on the basis of the data presented:

1. That Archaea possess membrane-bound acidocalcisomes/volutin granules.

2. That volutin granules evolved prior to the divergence of the three domains.

These are bold claims. However, my reading of the manuscript leads me to conclude that the authors do not currently have sufficient evidence to fully support either of these claims. I address each in turn.

1. That Archaea possess membrane-bound acidocalcisomes/volutin granules.

Figure ​Figure11 presents electron micrographs of Methanosarcina acetivorans cells (panels c & d) wherein intracellular structures are clearly visible as either black (electron dense) or white (putatively empty). The resolution of panels c & d make it difficult to see any evidence for a membrane; plate d in particular is pixellated. I therefore find it difficult to evaluate the presented evidence as being either supportive or dismissive of a membrane surrounding these structures. No other cell biological evidence is given to support the interpretation presented in the paper, in notable contrast to the careful and extensive experimental evidence previously presented by the lead author for the characterization of acidocalcisome structures in the bacterium Agrobacterium tumefaciens (J Biol Chem 278, 29971-8). The results in figure ​figure11 therefore are far too preliminary to be presented in support of acidocalcisomes or acidocalcisome-like structures in Methanosarcina.

I note that proton pyrophosphatase pumps have previously been identified in Archaea, having been experimentally characterized in Pyrobaculum aerophilum (Drozdowicz et al. 1999 FEBS Lett 460:505-12) -- it seems somewhat surprising that no reference to this paper is made. From what I can ascertain, no data indicate an association of these pumps with any internal membrane structure in Pyrobaculum. I am therefore curious as to whether acidocalcisome-like structures have been characterized in this archaeon. Finally, given that those authors were able to express the Pyrobaculum pyrophosphatase in yeast, have antibodies have been successfully raised against this enzyme? This is helpful information, since my reading of the literature indicates that these pumps are known to associate with acidocalcisomes, though not exclusively; with that in mind, it is rather a leap to equate presence of H+-PPases in Archaea with the presence of acidocalcisomes. Experiments of the sort presented in the above-noted JBC paper are essential for any claim for the existence of such structures in Archaea.

2. That volutin granules evolved prior to the divergence of the three domains.

The authors also present genomic evidence (H+-PPase sequences) in support of acidocalcisomes in archaea. The implicit argument in this part of the paper is that one can extrapolate acidocalcisome presence based on identification of H+-PPases in Genbank.

There are two interesting points here. First, it is nice to see that the authors are honest regarding the limits of phylogeny in this particular instance. The previously inflammatory acronym MUTOG (Myth of the Universal Tree from One Gene -- coined by David Penny) does need to be taken seriously following the recognition that most genes do not carry sufficient phylogenetic signal to trace the relationships between species across the three domains. Moreover, with HGT an indisputable factor in gene distribution, this caution is not only welcome, but necessary. Against this backdrop, that a clearly resolved three-domain tree cannot be generated for the V-H+PPases (for instance, the archaeal sequences do not form a monophyly: Methanococcoides is on alone branch, Pyrobaculum and Caldivirga form a clade, and there is a third clade of five sequences, including Methanosarcina acetivorans, that connects the tree at the large central polytomy) is not evidence against an ancient pre-LUCA origin. Having said that, it is not evidence in favor of it either. The dual forces of mutation and gene transfer are having a major impact on the reconstruction of the deep evolutionary past and it may be that signal has in most cases been heavily degraded, to the point that it cannot be informatively identified.

The second point lies at the heart of this paper. The triumph of endosymbiotic theory has been the recognition that some key eukaryotic organelles did not evolve de novo, but are instead the result of one cell becoming resident within another. The emerging view of complex membrane structures has therefore been one of continuity (TCS), though this may yet be challenged by the recognition that both bacteria and archaea can harbor complex cell structures. In the case of acidocalcisome/volutin granule organelles, it seems plausible to suggest a deep evolutionary origin, given the presence of both the H+PPases and these organelles across representatives from all three domains of life. This would suggest that multiple losses have occurred throughout evolution, from a more compartmentally complex common ancestor. What we still don't know, and are challenged to think about by this paper, is whether complex internal membrane structures such as these could arise multiple times independently. In this respect, comparative analyses do have an important role to play in establishing what the minimum number of components required to support an acidocalcisome or volutin granule may be. The variability in membrane number and architecture observed across Planctomycetes (Fuerst) does suggest a greater capacity for evolution of novel membranes than suggested by a stringently 'genetic' view (sensu Cavalier-Smith) of membrane evolution. More fine-scale examination of whether the distribution of key proteins localized to acidocalcisomes/volutin granules completely overlaps with the existence of these organelles. In addition, looking at evolution within a group (e.g. relatives of Agrobacterium tumefaciens) may help elucidate whether or not horizontal gene transfer does play a role in the emergence of such complex cell structure. It might be time to ask just whether our assumptions about how 'hard' it is to evolve a compartment are in need of scrutiny.

The argument presented here, that compartmentation is much older than we may expect based on the presumed late origin of the eukaryote nucleus and endomembrane system, has been given an additional boost in this manuscript from Seufferheld and colleagues. However, the jury is certainly still out -- on the present data, it is difficult to distinguish between either a deep evolutionary origin with numerous losses, or 'convergent' origins (of the organelles, not the H+PPases). We do not yet know whether independent recruitment (via horizontal transfer) of key functionalities, such as the H+PPases, are sufficient for the independent evolution of a new membrane-bound organelle. The authors make the reasonable assumption that loss is more likely, and bolster their argument by relating their provocative model a possible early role for pyrophosphate/polyphosphate in the origin and early evolution of life. The obvious problem with scenarios that invoke loss from a more complex ancestral state is that one also needs to explain the original gain. The present manuscript does not give us an answer, but this and other results do challenge us to keep an open mind.