This article investigates the possible role of horizontal gene transfer in early evolution, and reports that, under accurate replication, lower rates of HGT are optimal. Taking a modelling approach to the genetic make-up of early systems seems to me to be the most productive way of addressing speculation on the role of HGT in early evolution. The analyses reported by Vogan and Higgs make a number of assumptions that are worth considering further. In the model, there is a selective advantage s for each gene type represented in a genome, and a lower cost c for every gene present. Because s >c, all non-duplicate genes are beneficial, but duplicate copies are rendered deleterious, with cost c. Genes are lost with probability v, an event that is far more frequent than the emergence of new gene types u, and h is the mean number of genes gained per genome by HGT. A consequence of this set up is that HGT will on the whole be advantageous because genes are lost v, and new genes are advantageous s. An obvious comment is that because gene types are generally advantageous, where deletion rates v are extremely low, HGT should be marginalised. This leads to the interesting conclusion that, using the gene-loss parameter v as a proxy for mutational loss of function, the higher fidelity a system is, the lower the optimal value of h. Under high v, HGT becomes essential because this counters loss of fitness arising from reduction in gene types.

The work presented here is interesting in that it attempts to address the key question of whether rates of gene transfer would have been higher at the earliest stages of evolution. The assumption that early genetic systems were subject to higher rates of transfer seems to have been widely adopted, but Vogan and Higgs rightfully recognise that this assumption does need to be scrutinised. The analysis presented by the authors does do this, and their result is therefore bound to be of broad interest. However, an important omission in this model is the association of genes with specific functions. Because all non-redundant genes are advantageous, and all combinations are allowed, in contrast to models like the hypercycle [19] or the Stochastic Corrector Model [21], the model presented here has no requirement for a specific combination of genes to be present for the system (i.e. cells) to operate. This amounts to an extreme form of functional redundancy (any unique gene will do), making the model rather abstract.

Another area where the analysis presented does need to be taken further concerns how redundancy is treated. In the model presented here, redundancy is disadvantageous. A significant body of literature argues that redundancy is likely for low-fidelity systems, since it buffers against gene loss. Previous authors have shown this using modelling-based approaches [22,23]. The model presented here essentially replaces redundancy with gene receipt (because any unique gene will do as a counter to gene loss). Making redundant copies deleterious therefore ignores previous results arguing that redundancy will be important in systems with low fidelity, both as it can buffer against mutation and because selection can operate between variants even at high copy number. It also seems clear that this model does create the conditions wherein an alternative process favours a different form of redundancy. It would therefore be interesting to know what happens if one requires some combination of gene types to be present, and, rather than a model wherein 'any non-redundant gene type will do', the authors instead required specific gene types to replace lost genes.

A third issue is that further examination of the possible role of HGT in early evolution may require a model that incorporates different levels of selection. While the authors discuss this in their manuscript, their model focuses only on selection at the level of the cell. Expanding discussion to models where two levels of selection can operate, such as the Stochastic Corrector Model [21,24] would therefore be valuable.

The concern I raised [26] about the 'communal ancestor' model was that it isn't clear on levels of selection, and, in the form presented by Woese, it seems to be predicated on naive group selection arguments (genes cooperating by default and in the absence of parasites - a clear parallel exists with the shortcomings of the hypercycle [34]. In this respect, the model presented by Vogan and Higgs does not address the problem of "communal" gene sets because all non-redundant gene combinations are equivalent, and no genes are ever detrimental. So if I understand correctly, the only reason for transfer being favoured at all in this model seems to be because v is not zero and all genes are functionally redundant. Cooperating gene sets must have emerged at some point, and explaining their emergence from a system that is vulnerable to gene-level selection (i.e. parasites) is a crucial part of the evolutionary transition to cells [35]. I note however that the authors state in their discussion that, under a model with parasites and gene disruptions (via genome insertions), HGT would be less advantageous than in the case considered.