Editorial
Proteins perform diverse functions in living organisms. The functions of proteins are mainly dictated by their structures.
Elucidating the structure-function relationship in proteins, understanding the mechanism of protein folding and stability as well
as the recognition of proteins with other molecules are intriguing and challenging tasks in protein science. The problem of
protein folding, stability and interactions has been viewed through several perspectives using experimental and computational
approaches [1]. The study has also been extended for predicting protein-protein interaction networks, annotation of genomes
and proteomics analysis.
 The special issue on “Structure and function of proteins” is aimed at providing a recent update on the experimental and
computational analysis of proteins based on their folding, stability and interactions as well as the analysis on genomes and
proteomes. It addressed various issues such as structure and functions of different types of proteins, protein folding rates and
stability. Further, it covered protein-protein, protein-carbohydrate and protein-ligand interactions, structure based drug design
and analysis of genomes and proteomes. The special issue is broadly classified into four parts; the first part is focused on the
aspects of protein structure and function with three articles, second part with three papers emphasizes new methods for
understanding protein folding and stability, third part is devoted to protein interactions, which has six papers and the last part is
dealing with disease genes and mass spectrometry based proteomics analysis with three papers.
 The opening article by Moin and Omar [2] discussed the purification and catalytic mechanism of laccase enzymes using
experimental techniques for understanding of their structure-function relationship. In the subsequent papers, the structurefunction relationships of serpins and hypothetical proteins identical to ADP-ribosylation superfamily have been delineated
using computational approaches [3,4]. Suresh and Parthasarathy [5] developed a support vector machines based method for
predicting protein blocks using sequence profiles and secondary structures. Huang [6] framed a set of rules for discriminating
protein mutants, which accelerate or decelerate protein folding process using statistical and machine learning methods. The
thermodynamic stability and flexibility of antibody fragments complexes has been tackled by Li et al. [7].
 Ohue et al. [8] developed a prediction system, MEGADOCK for elucidating protein-protein interactions using tertiary
structure data. Sowmya and Ranganathan [9] discussed the structural basis of protein-protein interactions and compiled
different prediction servers. Matsusaki et al. [10] used rigid-body docking tools for predicting protein-protein interaction
networks with an application to chemotaxis. Gromiha et al. [11] proposed an energy based approach for understanding the
recognition mechanism of protein-carbohydrate complexes from the analysis of binding site residues. Oak and Jayaraman [12]
utilized machine learning methods for identifying the ligand binding pockets on nuclear receptors. Further, docking studies
have been performed to identify potential antiviral drugs for dengue virus [13].
 Ishida et al. [14] developed bioinformatics approaches for screening autoimmune diseases of genes. The mapping and
annotation of obesity related genes in a couple of genomes have been carried out by Martelli et al. [15]. Petric et al. [16] used
text mining and gene prioritization methods for generating biomedical hypothesis. Reiz et al. [17] discussed the filtering of
mass spectra for proteome analysis based on precursor mass.
 In essence, this special issue comprehends the exciting developments in the area of protein structure and function as well as
screening of disease genes and mass spectrometry based proteomics analysis. It will be a valuable resource for computational
biologists, biochemists, biophysicists, bioinformaticians and researchers working in the field of proteins.
 I would like to thank all the authors for their outstanding contributions and cooperation to complete the task. The guest
editor thanks the Editor-in-Chief Professor Ben Dunn for his invitation and encouragement, and Mr. Rukhshanda for his help
and support for the successful completion of editing the special issue. 