A Statistical Model for Predicting Protein Folding Rates from Amino Acid Sequence with Structural Class Information

Abstract
Prediction of protein folding rates from amino acid sequences is one of the most important challenges in molecular biology. In this work, I have related the protein folding rates with physical-chemical, energetic and conformational properties of amino acid residues. I found that the classification of proteins into different structural classes shows an excellent correlation between amino acid properties and folding rates of two- and three-state proteins, indicating the importance of native state topology in determining the protein folding rates. I have formulated a simple linear regression model for predicting the protein folding rates from amino acid sequences along with structural class information and obtained an excellent agreement between predicted and experimentally observed folding rates of proteins; the correlation coefficients are 0.99, 0.96 and 0.95, respectively, for all-α, all-β and mixed class proteins. This is the first available method, which is capable of predicting the protein folding rates just from the amino acid sequence with the aid of generic amino acid properties and structural class information.

Introduction
Predicting the three-dimensional structure of a protein from its amino acid sequence is a challenging problem. A related interesting and important task is to understand the relationship between sequences and folding rates of proteins.1 As an advance to this problem, Plaxco et al.2 proposed the concept of contact order (CO) using the information about the average sequence separation of all contacting residues in the native state of two-state proteins and found a significant correlation between CO and protein folding rates. Gromiha and Selvaraj3 emphasized the importance of long-range contacts for determining the folding rates of two-state proteins and defined a novel parameter, long-range order (LRO) from the knowledge of long-range contacts (contact between two residues that are close in space and far in the sequence) in protein structure. Accordingly, theoretical models have been proposed for predicting the folding rates of two-state proteins based on long-range contacts.3-5 Recently, thermodynamic and kinetic experiments demonstrated that long-range order is one of the best parameters that correlates with protein-refolding rates including circular permutations of ribosomal proteins S6 from Thermus thermophilus.6

Debe and Goddard7 have predicted the folding rates for 21 small, single-domain, topologically distinct proteins based on the first principles of protein folding and observed a good correlation with experimentally observed folding rates. Munoz and Eaton8 have proposed an elementary statistical mechanical model to calculate the protein folding rates from their three-dimensional structures. Dinner and Karplus9 performed a statistical analysis to predict the protein folding rates and reported that both contact order and stability play important roles in determining the folding rate. Further, neural networks based models have been developed to relate folding rates of proteins from the combination of topological parameters, contact order, long-range order and total contact distance.10 Recently, the role of chain length, native state geometry and the topological properties of protein conformation for determining the protein folding rates have been reported.11-13

Currently, all the available methods for predicting the folding rates of two- and three-state proteins are based on their three-dimensional structures, and no method has been proposed for predicting the folding rates from amino acid sequence, so far. Hence, it is necessary to develop a model for predicting the protein folding rates from their amino acid sequences, which could serve as a useful tool for predicting the folding rates of proteins with unknown structure. The folding of a protein is mainly dictated by interresidue interactions, which are influenced by physical, chemical, energetic and conformational properties of amino acid residues. In this work, I have related various amino acid properties with folding rates of two- and three-state proteins. I found that the classification of proteins into different structural classes shows a good correlation between amino acid properties and protein folding rates. I have set up linear regression models using amino acid properties for predicting the folding rates of proteins from the amino acid sequence along with structural class information. I found an excellent agreement between experimental and predicted protein folding rates, and the correlation coefficients are 0.97 and 0.93, with back-check prediction and jack-knife test, respectively.

Materials and Methods
Experimental Folding Rates. The experimental folding rates of 32 two- and three-state proteins used in related works3,4,14 form the basis for the present study. The Protein Data Bank codes15 and experimental ln(kf) values are given in Table 1. The structural classification of these proteins yielded six all-α, 13 all-β and 13 mixed class proteins. Further, I have validated the present method using a set of other 17 two- and three-state proteins.

Amino Acid Properties. I used a set of 49 diverse amino acid properties (physical-chemical, energetic and conformational), which fall into various clusters analyzed by Tommi and Kanehisa16 in the present study. The amino acid properties were normalized between 0 and 1 using the expression, Pnorm(i) = [P(i) − Pmin]/[Pmax − Pmin], where P(i), Pnorm(i) are, respectively, the original and normalized values of amino acid i for a particular property, and Pmin and Pmax are, respectively, the minimum and maximum values. The numerical values of 20 amino acid residues for six selected properties are presented in Table 2. Further, the numerical and normalized values for all the 49 properties used in this study along with their brief descriptions have been explained in our earlier articles17,18 and are available on the Web at http://www.cbrc.jp/∼gromiha/fold_rate/property.html. These properties were obtained either directly from experiments or by computational methods using three-dimensional structures of proteins.

Computational Procedure. The average amino acid property for each protein, Pave(i) was computed using the standard formula

where P(j) is the property value of jth residue and the summation is over N, the total number of residues in a protein. These property values have been obtained from the table of 20 amino acid residues (e.g. Table 2), and no structural information of a specific protein is required for computation. The computed property value Pave(i) for each class of proteins was related with experimental folding rate lnkf(i) using single correlation coefficient. Further, I have combined the amino acid properties using multiple regression technique.19 The statistical significance of the results obtained in the present study has been verified with t-test and p-value by standard procedures.

Results and Discussion
Role of Protein Structural Classes. In our earlier work, we have analyzed the influence of interresidue interactions in different structural classes, and we found that the interacting pattern is distinct in each structural class.20 Further, the analysis on the predictive accuracy of several secondary structure prediction algorithms indicates the necessity of structural classification for better performance.21,22 On the other hand, several methods are available to predict the protein structural class with high accuracy.23

The relationship between LRO and protein folding rates shows that the classification of proteins into three structural classes significantly improved the correlation.3 I have also reported that the single data set with the inclusion of proteins from all structural classes yielded a poor correlation (|r| ≤ 0.39) between amino acid properties and protein folding rates.24 In the present study, I found that the classification of proteins into all-α, all-β and mixed class remarkably enhanced the correlation from 0.39 to 0.97, and hence the structural classification is necessary for successful prediction of protein folding rates. This result reveals that the classification includes the information about the topology of protein, which is found to be an important determinant for protein folding rates.25

All-α Proteins.
The relationship between amino acid properties and protein folding rates of all-α proteins shows that the property power to be at the C-terminal of α-helix (abbreviated as αc)17,26 has the highest negative correlation with protein folding rates (r = −0.99). Further, the thermodynamic and conformational properties show significant correlation (0.6 to 0.9) with ln(kf) values. This observation reveals that the formation of local secondary structures enhances the folding rates of proteins and hence the folding process is the interplay between the local conformational preferences and long-range contacts.27 The all-α proteins have higher folding rates than other classes of proteins, in general, and hence the folding rates of this class of proteins may be well explained with single amino acid property. In contrast, when I generated 49 sets of random numbers and computed the correlation coefficients, I have obtained the average r-value of 0.34 ± 0.23. This verifies that one could clearly discriminate between amino acid properties and random numbers and emphasizes the validity of selecting amino acid properties for understanding/predicting protein folding rates.

I have developed a simple regression model for predicting the folding rates of all-α proteins using amino acid properties and the regression equation is

where αc is the power to be at the C-terminal of α-helix. The numerical values of αc and folding rates for the six all-α proteins are presented in Table 1. I observed an excellent agreement between the predicted folding rates and experimental observations. The correlation coefficient is 0.988 and average deviation is 0.142. Further, I have verified that the results are statistically significant (t = 12.09 and p ≤ 2.68e-4).

I have also performed the jack-knife test by determining the coefficients of the regression equation using (n-1) data (i.e., omitting one protein at a time) and then computing the folding rate of the omitted protein. I found that all the considered proteins agreed extremely well with experiment. The r-value is 0.958 (t = 6.685; p ≤ 2.69e-3), and the average deviation is 0.21. The cross-validation has also been performed with the complete data set of nine all-α class proteins (listed in Tables 1 and 3), and I obtained the correlation of 0.947 (t = 7.735; p ≤ 1.16e-3) between experimental and predicted folding rates. The R2 value is 0.895, and the average deviation is 0.39.

Zhou and Zhou4 used four all-α proteins and obtained the correlation of 0.92 between experimental and predicted folding rates. The r-values obtained with CO and LRO are, respectively, 0.56 and 0.72. Recently, Shao et al.28 proposed a new term, “helix parameter”, for predicting the protein folding rates and reported that it has the correlation of 0.927 with protein folding rate. The present model predicts the protein folding rates of all-α proteins at the highest accuracy of r = 0.99 and 0.96, respectively, with back-check prediction and jack-knife test. These correlation coefficients demonstrate the better performance of the present method compared to other methods in the literature.

All-β Proteins. In all-β proteins, the thermodynamic properties show significant correlation with protein folding rates, and the highest single property correlation is −0.696 with unfolding entropy change.29 Similar calculations with random numbers yielded the average correlation of 0.20 ± 0.16. As the single property with the highest r-value is not sufficient for accurate prediction I have combined different amino acid properties with a multiple regression fit. The computation has been carried out with the combinations of two to five amino acid properties, and I found that the combination of four properties substantially improved the correlation. The corresponding regression equation is

where K0, Pβ, Ra, and ΔASA are, respectively, compressibility,30 β-strand tendency,26 reduction in solvent accessibility31 and solvent accessible surface area for protein unfolding.29 This result shows that the combination of physical, thermodynamic and conformational properties of amino acid residues enhances the folding rates of all-β proteins. Experimental observations support my findings that the local secondary structure and conformational parameters influence the folding rates of proteins27,32 and thermodynamic parameters play an important role for determining the folding transition state structures of proteins.33 The inclusion of other properties may improve the correlation, but it will cause over fitting of the parameters. On the other hand, the combination of four properties could predict the folding rates of two- and three-state proteins at high accuracy.
I have analyzed the correlation coefficients obtained for a different combination of four amino acid properties, and the frequency of combinations at different ranges of correlation coefficients are shown in Figure 1a. From this figure, I noticed that most of the combinations have the correlation in the range of 0.5 to 0.8, and only two combinations have the correlation higher than 0.95. I have selected the properties that yielded the highest correlation coefficient for predicting protein folding rates.

The numerical values of the parameters, K0, Pβ, Ra and ΔASA for the considered all-β proteins along with their predicted and experimental ln(kf) values are given in Table 1. I found that the predicted protein folding rates have a very good agreement with experimental observations and the correlation between them is 0.956. The calculated p value is ≤ 2.58e-5 and t = 10.86. I have also carried out the jack-knife test, and the correlation obtained with this method is 0.890 (R2 = 0.799; p ≤ 1.85e-4 and t = 6.616).

Zhou and Zhou4 used a set of 13 all-β proteins and reported that the correlation between predicted protein folding rates using total contact distance and experimental data is 0.69. With the same data set, the present method predicted the folding rate of two-state proteins with the remarkable correlation of 0.956. The deviation of ln(kf) values obtained with total contact distance is 1.372, whereas the present method predicted the folding rate within the deviation of 0.575. Further, the standard error of each coefficient in Eqn. 3 is less than 5%. These results emphasize that the present method could be used for predicting the folding rates of unknown protein.

Mixed Class Proteins.
The relationship between amino acid properties and protein folding rates in a set of 13 mixed class proteins shows that the average medium-range contacts34,35 has the highest positive correlation (r = 0.68) with protein folding rates. This might be due to the fact that the short- and medium-range interactions may predominate and initiate protein folding with the formation of α-helices.36 On the other hand, a set of random numbers yielded the average correlation of 0.27 ± 0.20.

I have analyzed the variation of correlation coefficients due to the combination of several amino acid properties by using multiple regression technique. The correlation coefficient obtained with single property is 0.68 and it raised to 0.79, 0.88, 0.95 and 0.95, respectively, with the combination of 2 to 5 properties. I observed that the combination of four properties significantly improved the correlation, and hence I have used the regression equation derived with four amino acid properties for predicting the folding rates of mixed class proteins. The regression equation is

where ΔGhD is the Gibbs free energy change of hydration for denatured protein.29 Interestingly, the three properties, K0, Ra and ΔASA, are also important for determining the folding rates of all-β proteins. The combination of free energy with other thermodynamic and physical properties influences the fast folding rates of two- and three-state proteins. Previously, it has been shown that the combination of free energy and contact order determines the folding rates.9

The analysis on the variation of correlation coefficients at different combinations of amino acid properties revealed that most of the combinations yielded the correlation in the range of 0.5 to 0.8, as observed in all-β proteins (Figure 1b). The combination of the properties, K0, Ra, ΔASA and ΔGhD, has the highest correlation. The numerical values for all the properties and predicted ln(kf) values are presented in Table 1. I found an excellent correlation of 0.95 between experimental and predicted protein folding rates. Further, I have corroborated the statistical significance of the results (p ≤ 3.02e-5 and t = 10.3).

Recent studies on protein folding rates showed that the ln(kf) values of mixed class proteins have been predicted with high accuracy. The correlation coefficient obtained with CO, LRO and TCD are, respectively, 0.82, 0.86 and 0.92. The present method predicted the folding rates of two-state proteins with the highest accuracy, and the correlation coefficient is 0.95. I have also performed a jack-knife test and obtained the r-value of 0.87 (R2 = 0.749; p ≤ 3.9e-4; t = 5.729). The standard errors obtained for fitting the data are also included in Eqn. 4, which is less than 3%. Further, I have estimated the deviation of ln(kf) values, and the average deviation obtained for back-check prediction and jack-knife test are, respectively, 0.737 and 1.253.

Prediction of Protein Folding Rates.
I have used three different equations (Eqns. 2−4) for predicting the folding rates of proteins belonging to each structural class. The results obtained with back-check prediction are presented in Table 1. I found an excellent correlation of 0.97 between predicted and experimental protein folding rates for the sample set of 32 proteins as seen in Figure 2a. The t-test and p-values are, respectively, 23.54 and ≤ 2.98e-13, and the average deviation is 0.56. I have also performed a jack-knife test to examine the validity of the present method, and the results are shown in Figure 2b. I found that about 60% of the considered proteins (19 out of 32 proteins) agreed very well with the experiment and the deviation is less than one unit. The correlation coefficient between experimental and predicted ln(kf) values is 0.93 (t = 13.8; p ≤ 2.11 e-11), and the average deviation is 0.931.

Validating the Present Method. I have calculated the folding rates of other 17 two- and three-state proteins belonging to different structural classes and compared the predicted ln(kf) values with experimental observations. I have presented the list of proteins along with predicted and experimental folding rates in Table 3. In all-α proteins, all the three proteins are predicted within the deviation of 1.1. The correlation between predicted and experimental ln(kf) values in all-β proteins is 0.95. In mixed proteins, 8 out of 9 proteins are predicted within the deviation of 1.0. Considering all the 17 proteins together, the correlation coefficient is 0.94, and the average deviation is 0.96. Recently, Scott et al.37 reported the folding rate of α-spectrin 15th domain for which the three-dimensional structure is not available. I have calculated the folding rate using Eqn. 2 and observed a good agreement between predicted and experimental folding rates (within the deviation of 2.0). This result emphasizes the validity of the present method for predicting the protein folding rates.
Prediction of Protein Folding Rates upon Mutations. I have examined the performance of the present method for predicting the protein folding rates upon mutations. Viguera et al.38 measured the experimental folding rates of SH3 domain of src for the wild-type protein and seven mutants. This protein belongs to all-β class, and I have calculated the folding rates using Eqn. 3. The relationship between experimental and predicted folding rates is shown in Figure 3, and I observed a good agreement. The r value is 0.87, and the average deviation is 0.60.

Vu et al.39 constructed a pseudo wild type of barnase, in which residue His102 is mutated to Ala. They have measured the folding rates of 15 mutants under the background of pseudo wild-type protein. Barnase belongs to a mixed class protein, and I have calculated the difference of folding rates for each of the 15 mutants with respect to pseudo wild-type protein using Eqn. 4 and the results are presented in Table 4. I found that 12 out of 15 mutants are predicted within the deviation of 1.0. This data set contains several mutants with the same amino acid replacements at different positions (e.g., L89G and L95G; Y13G, Y17G and Y97G), and the present method is not able to distinguish them.

From these results I observed that the positional parameters play an important role in understanding the protein folding rates upon mutations, and the analysis based on the separation of mutants based on secondary structure and solvent accessibility may improve the accuracy of prediction as in the case of protein mutant stability and Φ value analysis.40-42

Comparison with Other Methods. The protein folding rate predictive ability of eight different methods along with the results obtained with the present multiple regression model are presented in Table 5.

Plaxco et al.2 proposed the concept of contact order and related it with protein folding rates. Gromiha and Selvaraj3 introduced the parameter, long-range order from the knowledge of long-range contacts in protein structures for predicting protein folding rates. Zhou and Zhou4 combined the parameters CO and LRO and formed the term, total contact distance to relate with protein folding rates. The correlation coefficients obtained with CO, LRO and TCD are, respectively, 0.74, 0.81 and 0.88. Debe and Goddard7 proposed a method based on first principles approach and reported the correlation of 0.78 between experimental and predicted folding rates. Munoz and Eaton8 developed a simple statistical model and obtained the correlation of 0.83 between theory and experiment. Dinner and Karplus9 combined CO and free energy change to predict the folding rates of two-state proteins and reported the correlation of 0.79. Recently, Makarov et al.43 developed a topomer search model, which increased the correlation to 0.89. Further, Gong et al.44 proposed a multiple regression model for predicting the protein folding rates with their local secondary structure content and reported the correlation coefficient of 0.91. The present method shows the correlation of 0.97 and 0.93 between experimental and predicted folding rates with the back-check and jack-knife tests, respectively. These accuracy levels are better than other methods in the literature. The high accuracy attained by the present method may be due to the following reasons:  (i) it revealed the important amino acid properties for accelerating protein folding rates, (ii) the combination of properties has been systematically selected for understanding/predicting the folding rates of proteins, and (iii) the selected properties are reliable in understanding protein folding rates as demonstrated from experiments.

Although the direct comparison of correlation coefficients obtained in the present work with the other methods is not appropriate, the empirical relationships derived for different structural classes predict the folding rates with greatest accuracy. Further, all the other methods use the three-dimensional structure information for predicting the protein folding rates. The present method is the first available one, which uses the amino acid sequence (along with structural class information) for predicting the folding rates of proteins. These comparisons reveal the superior performance of the present method for predicting the folding rates of proteins.

Conclusions
The interaction of amino acid residues among themselves and with surrounding medium dictates the structure of a protein and hence the rate of folding. Interresidue interactions are mainly influenced by physical-chemical, energetic and conformational properties of amino acid residues in protein structures. I have systematically analyzed the relationship between amino acid properties and protein folding rates in different structural classes of proteins. I have set up linear regression models for predicting the folding rates of two- and three-state proteins using the combination of amino acid properties. The present method is the first one, which can predict the protein folding rates from amino acid sequence along with structural class information. The predicted folding rates show an excellent correlation with experimental observations; the correlation coefficients are 0.99, 0.96 and 0.95, respectively, for all-α, all-β and mixed class proteins. These accuracy levels are superior to other methods in the literature.
