Population Genomics: How Bacterial Species Form and Why They Don't Exist
Summary
Two processes suggested to drive bacterial speciation — periodic selection and recombination — are generally thought to be mutually opposed. Recent work shows that data taken as evidence supporting the former may be explained by the latter, raising further problems for the idea of bacterial ‘species’.

Main Text
The concept of species is famously difficult, especially for bacteria. Mayr's ‘Biological Species Concept’ — that species are interbreeding groups separated from other such groups by reproductive barriers — would not apply to bacteria at all if, as once believed, they are always asexual, never recombining genetically. Obviously, though not trivially, there would be no ‘interbreeding’. But some authors maintain that even asexual, non-recombining clones can mimic ‘biological species’ in important ways. Specifically, ecologically differentiated clonal organisms can maintain relatively constant within-population genomic and phenomic similarity (cohesion) over time, while exhibiting increasing between-population divergence. An important driver in this ecotype model[1] is periodic selection, the operation of which seemed to be favored by earlier data from several groups, including the MIT labs of Martin Polz and Eric Alm. But now these workers offer a serious challenge to the model [2].

Periodic selection, first understood through the chemostat experiments of Kim Atwood [3], is what happens when, in a finite population of non-recombining organisms in a stable niche, a mutant arises that is better able to use the niche's resources. Through selection, all organisms in the population will eventually be the direct descendants of this favored mutant ancestor. And because there is no recombination, their genomes will bear at all loci only direct lineal descendants of those specific alleles the lucky mutant happened to have in its genome at the time.

Populations will thus be ‘purged’ of all allelic diversity accumulated before the mutation occurred, and if phylogenetic trees are made based on whatever changes have accumulated in genes after that, those trees will all have the same topology. New diversity-purging ‘selective sweeps’ of this sort will ensue each time a fitter-type mutation appears, so even at marker genes not under selection there will be little persistent sequence diversity. The population stays genetically cohesive within itself, while diverging from other ecologically differentiated populations, experiencing their own niche-driven selective sweeps.

A real-world expectation is that phylogenetic patterns of non-selected marker genes sequenced from an environmental sample (most often phylogenetic tags such as 16S rRNA or hsp 60 genes), will exhibit ‘microdiversity’ — clusters of many identical or very nearly identical sequences, separated from each other by deep gaps. Clusters should represent ‘ecotypes’, with whatever internal diversity their genes do show reflecting mutations arising since the last genome-wide sweep. And we'd expect to see some ecological specialization between clusters, if we knew where to look.

In a 2004 survey of 16S rRNA diversity among Vibrio species in Massachusetts coastal water samples, Polz's team observed just such microdiverse clusters [4], and four years later Hunt et al.[5] began to characterize clusters ecologically, based on the sizes of particles (if any) on which they could be found after filtration (particle size is important to vibrios, many of which grow on or in the bodies of tiny marine invertebrates). They indeed found “numerous ecologically distinct populations at different levels of phylogenetic distinction” within one named species, V. splendidus. By the ecotype model, the genomes of different individuals in each hsp60-defined ecologically distinct cluster should show pretty much the same low degree of within-cluster divergence — and pretty much the same (although a higher) degree of between-cluster diversity — in all regions of their genomes, including those bearing the alleles under ecological selection. And all regions should produce the same phylogenetic tree (statistical noise aside).

But now, comparing 13 “L” V. cyclotrophicus isolates from large particle habitats and seven “S” isolates from small particle habitats using complete genome sequences, Shapiro et al.[2] have found this very much not to be the case. Of more than 29,000 single-nucleotide polymorphisms — SNPs, alternative base assignments among the ‘core’ genes shared by all 20 genomes — only 725 are ‘ecoSNPs’ (one nucleotide variant being found in all L strains and an alternative in all S strains). With the ecotype model (or by chance), these should be randomly distributed around the genomes. In fact they are heavily concentrated, 80% found in three small patches and most of the rest in only 11 others, collectively comprising only a few percent of these genomes. Genes in these patches mostly make ecological sense (being involved in biofilm formation, virulence and host colonization, for instance). Contrary to the ecotype model, only those alleles that are responsible for ecological differentiation appear to have been fixed in the two habitat-defined populations.

Diversity at these habitat-specific sites within S or L strains is generally lower than in the rest of their genomes, indicating that the selected regions have spread recently, possibly after their introduction by recombination from donors outside either group. One way to think about this would be that arrival of these new ecologically-relevant genes indeed initiated whole-genome selective sweeps, yet recombination was so frequent and pervasive that long before the genome with the selected allele achieved fixation or even significant prominence, all regions at any distance from that allele had been replaced, often many times over, by recombination with other genomes. Alternatively, as Shapiro et al.[2] prefer (E. Alm, personal communication), the eco-selected genes have been introduced independently into multiple recipients in the population. Either way, diversity was not effectively purged.

There is much additional evidence in this paper [2] for rampant within-habitat recombination. Outside the ecotype-specific regions, different genomic segments have different trees, often with mixed clades of L and S types and no single tree favored by more than 1% of genomic length. Interestingly, very recent recombination events, detected by comparing closely related genome pairs, are preferentially habitat-confined (within S or L clades), while older events cross the habitat boundary. It thus appear that the two ecologically differentiated populations are becoming increasingly isolated genetically, increasingly preferring to exchange DNA with their own type, possibly only because of propinquity. One consequence is that, even at unselected markers, the two populations will increasingly exhibit cohesive divergence, all genes tending to produce two distinguishable and possibly ‘microdiverse’ clusters. Such a result would likely have been taken, before the careful work of Shapiro et al.[2], as evidence for periodic selection.

In fact, this all looks very much like Mayrian Biological Species behavior, as these authors point out while cautioning that “No matter how marked the decline in gene flow between ecological populations, they will always remain open to uptake of DNA from other populations, thus remaining fundamentally different from biological species of sexual eukaryotes”. Moreover, although Shapiro et al.[2] don't say this, we must be cautious about generalizing such a result. Recombination depends crucially on biological processes (inducible transformation systems, within-biofilm communication, plasmid behavior, phage availability and host ranges) and physical factors (particle structures and concentrations, hydrodynamic parameters) that are wildly variable and contingent (see, for instance, [6]). There is no reason to suppose that for other bacterial species, or even for V. cyclotrophicus at a different time and place, periodic selection might not dominate.

So while efforts like that of Shapiro et al.[2] are enormously useful in illustrating or exemplifying how bacterial ‘speciation’ might occur, their conclusions are not generalizable. There will be no single final answer to the question: ‘how do bacterial populations speciate?’ or even ’how do they adaptively diverge?’ Moreover, by reminding us that two conceptually opposite population genetic processes can mimic each other in producing cohesively diverging genomic/phenomic clusters that some might call ‘species’, such studies highlight the ontological vacuity of that vexed word. The ‘species problem’ is to find a biological process that underwrites and makes ‘natural’ some particular pattern or extent of clustering, telling us what in general a species is and how to recognize one [7]. But if multiple and indeed potentially opposed processes are driving bacterial population genomic evolution with variable intensities and consequences, then there is no reason to expect that all bacteria will belong to clusters at any specified level of cohesiveness, and no non-arbitrary (process-related) criteria for specifying any such level.
