A Proposed Terminology of Convergent Evolution

Abstract In this paper, we propose a unified terminology of convergence, in which
the phenomenon of convergent evolution is the set, and the types of convergent
evolution are subsets of that phenomenon. The set of the convergence phenomenon
contains all of the same or very similar traits that have evolved independently in
different lineages of organisms. This set contains three subsets that specify the three
pathways by which evolution may produce convergence: allo-convergent evolution,
iso-convergent evolution, and retro-convergent evolution. Allo-convergent evolution
is the independent evolution of the same or very similar new trait from different
precursor traits in different lineages, iso-convergent evolution is the independent
evolution of the same or very similar new trait from the same precursor trait in
different lineages, and retro-convergent evolution is the independent re-evolution
of the same or very similar trait to an ancestral trait in different lineages. This
unified convergence terminology is proposed to replace the older and confusing
terms parallel evolution, reverse evolution, and convergent evolution sensu stricto.

1 Introduction
Convergence is the evolution of the same or very similar traits independently in
different lineages of organisms. The analysis of the evolutionary phenomenon of
convergence has been hampered in the past by a confusing terminology concerning
the mechanisms and directionality of that phenomenon, specifically usage of the
terms parallel evolution, reverse evolution, and convergent evolution sensu stricto.
“Parallel evolution” is a particularly unfortunate term in that this evolutionary process
in the past has been considered not only to be different from convergent evolution, but
in some cases has been considered to be the actual disproof of convergent evolution
(see discussion in McGhee 2011, pp. 5–7). Likewise, the term “reverse evolution”
has been used to describe both an evolutionary direction and/or an evolutionary
mechanism such as devolution.
In this paper, we propose a unified terminology of convergence, in which the
phenomenon of convergent evolution is the set, and the types of convergent evolution
are subsets of that phenomenon. In this terminology, the phenomenon of convergence
is the suffix of the term, and the type of convergent evolution is the prefix of the term.
This terminology was first proposed by McGhee et al. (2017) at the 21st Evolutionary
Biology Meeting at Marseilles (France), discussed in a review of convergence in
McGhee (2018), and now proposed in full form in this paper

2 Proposed Terminology
Our proposed convergence terminology is outlined in Table 1. The set of the convergence phenomenon contains all of the same or very similar traits that have evolved
independently in different lineages of organisms. This set contains three subsets
that specify the three pathways by which evolution may produce convergence:
allo-convergent evolution, iso-convergent evolution, and retro-convergent evolution
(Table 1).
Allo-convergent evolution is the independent evolution of the same or very similar
new trait from different precursor traits in different lineages (the prefix “allo” for
different). Iso-convergent evolution is the independent evolution of the same or very
similar new trait from the same precursor trait in different lineages (the prefix “iso”
for same). Retro-convergent evolution is the independent re-evolution of the same
or very similar trait to an ancestral trait in different lineages (the prefix “retro” for
reverse).
The subset of retro-convergent evolution itself contains two subsets that specify
the type of retro-convergence: retro-alloconvergent evolution and retro-isoconvergent
evolution. Retro-alloconvergent evolution is the independentre-evolution of the same
or very similar trait to an ancestral trait from different precursor traits in different
lineages. Retro-isoconvergent evolution is the independent re-evolution of the same
or very similar trait to an ancestral trait from the same precursor trait in different
lineages.

3 Examples of Allo-convergent, Iso-convergent,
and Retro-convergent Evolution
A classic example of allo-convergence is the independent evolution of wings in bats
and dragonflies (Table 2). The evolutionary lineage of a bat (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Chordata: Vertebrata) is very different and divergent from that of a dragonfly
(Bilateria: Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Arthropoda), yet both have evolved wings—but
from radically different precursor traits. The bat’s wings are modified vertebrate
forelimbs, whereas the dragonfly’s wings are modifications of gill branches originally present in the larval stage of development of the animal (the pleural origin
hypothesis; Averof and Cohen 1997), or a combination of gill branch segments and
dorsal body-wall segments (the dual origin hypothesis; Linz and Tomoyasu 2018).
A classic example of iso-convergence is the independent evolution of wings in
bats, birds, and the extinct pterodactyls of the Mesozoic (Table 2). A bat is a member
of the clade of the mammals, a bird is a member of the clade of the dinosaurs,
and a pterodactyl is a member of the clade of the pterosaurs—yet all three animals
are members of the larger inclusive clade of the vertebrates. And the same precursor
trait—the vertebrate forelimb—was independently modified to form wing structures
iso-convergently in bats, birds, and pterodactyls.
A classic example of retro-convergence is the independent re-evolution of ancestral fusiform-bodied fish forms in porpoises and the extinct ichthyosaurs (Table 3).
Fast-swimming, fusiform-bodied fish forms were independently, iso-convergently
evolved both in the clade of the chondrichthyan cartilaginous fishes, such as the
great white shark, and the osteichthyan bony fishes, such as the swordfish (Table 3,
Fig. 1), from the same ancestral swimming-fish forms. However, the porpoises and
the ichthyosaurs are descendants of land-dwelling mammals and reptiles, respectively, that once possessed four walking limbs, no fins, and no fish-like fusiform
bodies. Both the mammalian porpoise and the reptilian ichthyosaur independently,
retro-convergently, re-evolved fast-swimming, fusiform-bodied fish forms like their
osteichthyan ancestors (Fig. 1) when species in their respective lineages made the
evolutionary habitat shift from the land back into the oceans.
A porpoise fin is not inherited from a fish ancestor but is an independently derived
retro-convergent mammalian fin that is similar in form to an ancestral sarcopterygianosteichthyan fish fin. Likewise for the ichthyosaur fin—it is an independently derived
retro-convergent reptilian fin, not a fish fin. When we examine the retro-convergent
evolution of fins in these two lineages, we see that the evolution of mammalian and
reptilian fins followed both iso-convergent and allo-convergent pathways (Table 3).
The pectoral fins of both the porpoises and ichthyosaurs are retro-isoconvergently
evolved from the same precursor structure: tetrapod pentadactylus forelimbs (Benton
2015). In contrast, the dorsal fins in the porpoises and ichthyosaurs were retroalloconvergently evolved from two different precursor tissue structures to produce
a rope-like structure of fine filaments in the dorsal fin of the extinct ichthyosaurs
(Smithwick et al. 2017), and a dorsal fin of soft tissue with core placements of the
blood vessels in living porpoises (Felts 1966).

4 Replacement of Confusing Older Terminology
by the New Terminology of Convergence
In the older terminology of evolutionary convergence, iso-convergent evolution
replaces the term parallel evolution, retro-convergent evolution replaces the term
reverse evolution, and allo-convergent evolution is equivalent to the term convergent evolution sensu stricto. The problem with the term “parallel” evolution is that
it generated confusion in that it is often misunderstood not only to be different from
convergent evolution but in some cases the actual disproof of convergent evolution.
For example, the molecular discovery that the same regulatory gene (Pax-6) was
independently, in parallel, modified in the convergent evolution of eyes was mistakenly taken by Rey et al. (1998, p. 6212) to be a disproof of convergent evolution:
“An oft invoked example of convergent evolution has been compound eyes of insects
versus singular eyes of vertebrates. This proved to be a wrong example, however,
because development of all metazoan eyes recently has been shown to be under
control of the same regulatory gene that encodes Pax-6 protein.” In contrast, phylogenetic systematists consider parallel evolution to be a phenomenon that is “a special
case of convergence” in which the same trait has independently evolved “from the
same ancestral character in different taxa” (Lecointre and Le Guyader 2006, p. 541).
The term “parallel” evolution has created even greater confusion in that this same
term has been used to describe different evolutionary phenomena. For example, in
some molecular analyses Pontarotti and Hue (2016, p. 4) point out that the term
parallel evolution has been used to describe molecular convergence from the same
ancestral amino acid in different taxa and convergent evolution only used to describe
molecular convergence from different ancestral amino acids in different taxa, whereas
in other molecular analyses “the distinction between parallel and convergent evolution is not based on the evolutionary history of the characters, but on the similarity
of the genetic mechanisms that are involved in the repeated phenotype” such that
“if the molecular mechanisms are the same, the evolution is said to be parallel; if
the genetic mechanisms are different, the evolution is said to be convergent.” Even
more confusing, in phenotypic analyses the concept of “phylogenetic proximity”
(however defined) has been used to differentiate parallel and convergent evolution,
where the independent evolution of the same trait in phylogenetically close species is
described as parallel evolution, whereas the independent evolution of the same trait
in phylogenetically distant species is described as convergent evolution (Pontarotti
and Hue 2016).
Likewise, the term “reverse” evolution has generated confusion as it has been used
to describe both an evolutionary direction and/or an evolutionary mechanism such as
devolution. A term “retroconvergence” has been introduced by Krassilov (1995) but it
is not the same as the term “retro-convergence” used in this paper. Krassilov (1995,
2004) proposed the terms “cyclic evolution (retroconvergence)” (Krassilov 2004,
p. 265) for a process in which “retroconvergent morphological trends seem to indicate
gradual reversal of a modified genetic program to the original Gestalt inbuilt in the
genomic memory” (Krassilov 1995, p. 70). Krassilov (2004, p. 280) further stated
that “[a]n adaptive meaning of such cyclic transformations is scarcely conceivable.
Rather, the meaning is related to the nature of genomic memory retaining images
of lost basic structures, which can be conferred upon their derivative organs.” Thus
Krassilov’s proposed “cyclic evolution (retroconvergence)” is a process of devolution
of a descendant structure backwards into an ancestral structure.
In contrast, our term retro-convergent extends the same logic as the term isoconvergence for “parallel” convergent evolution to the case of “reverse” convergent
evolution, where the evolutionary pathway producing that convergence involves the
re-evolution of a trait very similar to an ancestral trait. That process involves modifying different precursor traits (retro-alloconvergence) or the same precursor traits
(retro-isoconvergence) in independent lineages to produce a descendant trait that
has the same or very similar form to that of an ancestral trait. That process is not
Krassilov’s (1995, 2004) devolution or backwards evolution. Using our terminology, Krassilov’s (1995, 2004) devolutionary “cyclic evolution (retroconvergence)”
process would represent an extreme case in which a descendant species is retroisoconvergent on its own ancestor.
For example, the pectoral fins of the ichthyosaurs and porpoises (Table 3) both
resemble the ancestral pectoral fins of their sarcopterygian-osteichthyan ancestors,
both in form and function. Yet the pectoral fin of an ichthyosaur is a reptile fin and the
pectoral fin of a porpoise is a mammalian fin—neither is a sarcopterygian fish fin.
The pentadactylus-manus bone structures of land-dwelling tetrapod forelimbs are
still present, although highly modified, in the pectoral fins of both the ichthyosaurs
and porpoises (Benton 2015). In contrast, in the “cyclic evolution (retroconvergence)”
scenario of Krassilov (1995, 2004), the pectoral fins of both the ichthyosaurs and porpoises would have to have been produced by a devolutionary process that would have
reversed the development of pentadactyly in the manus of the forelimbs of the reptilian and mammalian ancestors of the ichthyosaurs and porpoises, backwards to the
original non-pentadactylus bone arrangement in the pectoral fins of sarcopterygian
fish.
The new terminology is based on the analysis of phylogeny (Pontarotti and Hue
2016; McGhee 2018) and is strictly empirical, avoiding any terminological linkage
with the causation or development of the convergent phenomena described (contra
Gould 2002; Hall 2003). The analysis of the underlying causation of the empirical phenomena of allo-convergent, iso-convergent, retro-alloconvergent, and retroisoconvergent evolution is a separate process from the demonstration of the existence of the phenomena. Once convergent evolution at the phenotypic level has been
identified, co-convergent evolution at other levels can be tested: from the coding
level (DNA, genes) to gene-regulatory network levels, to the non-coding (epigenetic, transcriptional) and molecular levels (proteins, enzymes), to the physiological
(biochemical, organ systems) and phenotypic levels (single trait versus multivariate
convergence).
The new terminology also avoids any linkage with the interminable debate as
to what Gould (1989, 2002) meant by the term “contingent,” and how it relates
to “convergent” evolution versus “parallel” evolution (Pearce 2012; Powell 2012).
Beatty (2006, 2016), Sapp (2012), and McGhee (2016) have argued that Gould (1989,
2002) misused the term “contingent” throughout his work, confusing the distinction
between contingent per se and contingent upon (Beatty 2006, 2016) and creating a
false dichotomy between truly contingent evolution and teleological evolution that
continues to generate confusion in the analysis of convergence (Sapp 2012; McGhee
2016).

5 Summary and Proposed Future Research
In this paper, we have proposed a unified terminology of convergence, in which
the phenomenon of convergent evolution is the set, and the types of convergent
evolution are subsets of that phenomenon. In this terminology, the phenomenon of
convergence is the suffix of the term, and the type of convergent evolution is the
prefix of the term. The unified terminology of allo-convergence, iso-convergence,
retro-alloconvergence, and retro-isoconvergence covers the conceptual spectrum of
the types of convergent evolution.
In conclusion, we propose the following future research pathway in the analysis of the evolutionary phenomenon of convergence: First, the re-analysis of all
cases of convergent evolution that are described in the scientific literature at the
phenotypic level. The goal here is to sort out those that are iso-convergent and retroisoconvergent. Iso-convergence and retro-isoconvergence at the phenotypic level
could be linked to similar mechanisms at other biological levels (see detailed discussion in Pontarotti and Hue 2016, pp. 10–17), thus the causative mechanism for the
known cases of phenotypic convergences may be analyzed at this research step. Second, the documentation of new and previously unrecognized cases of iso-convergent
and retro-isoconvergent evolution, particularly those that may have been reported as
parallel or reverse and not convergent. And third, the creation of an internationally
accessible database that integrates the different cases of iso-convergent and retroisoconvergent evolution at all different biological levels that were documented in the
first and second steps of the proposed research pathway.
