Culturing: Looking it up in our gut

A new, publicly available, collection of cultured bacterial species from the mouse gut, the Mouse Intestinal Bacterial Collection, opens up opportunities for deepening microbiome research. Cultured isolates allow the functions of specific species and controlled consortia to be determined through in vitro experimentation.

Stephen Colbert famously advocated evaluating a claim for truthfulness by looking it up in our guts (rather than, for example, in a book; https://youtu.be/OBRKPoAPXEQ). As the connections between the gut and brain become ever clearer, and the microbiome is implicated in more and more phenomena, ranging from the unsurprising (inflammatory bowel disease) to the amazing (rheumatoid arthritis and autism)1,2, the need to reference back to our gut is becoming increasingly apparent.

However, there are many research questions we fundamentally can't answer using human subjects, and animal models play a critical role in microbiome science. In particular, the success of faecal transplants and personalized culture collections in translating human phenotypes into mice have revolutionized our ability to connect the microbiome to function.

Nonetheless, it's important to remember that humanized gnotobiotic mice are an imperfect model. Mice naturally have a completely different microbiome from humans, and when mice colonized with human-derived microbiota are co-housed with mice colonized with mouse-derived microbiota, the latter displace the former in a matter of days3. In contrast, colonizing mice with different mouse-derived microbiota, for example following antibiotic treatment, is relatively easy, and the results can be stable for months4. Beyond this, huge numbers of mutants and experimental conditions are available in mice, but not in humans. So, a better understanding of the mouse microbiome is essential for continued progress in microbiome research.

To address this need, in this issue of Nature Microbiology Lagkouvardos et al.5 set the bar for establishing a publicly available, host-specific bioresource and corresponding sequencing database. Here, the authors document the meticulous isolation and cataloguing of some of the most abundant and prevalent bacterial species of the mouse intestine. Using standard colony picking and streaking techniques, they isolated 76 unique bacterial species from the faecal samples of multiple mouse strains from diverse locations around the world, including commercial mouse facilities, a specific pathogen-free facility, and from the wild. Importantly, stocks of the entire collection, termed the Mouse Intestinal Bacterial Collection (miBC), were deposited with the German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures (DSMZ), which makes them available to scientists around the world for future experiments that test their specific functions. Interestingly, this culture-based exploration identified 15 novel species that had been missed by earlier large-scale metagenomic sequencing efforts. In addition to the benefit of creating stock cultures, this discovery of novel taxa highlights the advantage of strain-level isolation efforts.

Alignment of the miBC with the whole dataset available in the Sequence Read Archive, which includes millions of 16S rRNA reads derived from various sampling sites of humans and mice, revealed that the majority of sequences map to host gut-derived sample sets. Furthermore, twice as many sequences aligned to mouse-derived bacteria than human-derived bacteria, adding validity to the idea that many microorganisms are host-specific and that host-specific resources are therefore needed.

Impressively, a coverage assessment of the miBC against a large, multi-institute 16S rRNA dataset of mouse faecal samples revealed that the miBC already includes the majority of bacterial mouse intestinal species as revealed by metagenomics or in previous culture collections. A selection of 18 of the most specific and widely shared species was identified as the minimal bacteriome (MIBAC-1). This subset was shown to represent up to 75% of the functional capability of the mouse intestinal microbiome, and serves as an important step toward standardizing mouse models. However, with only 100 strains in the miBC, it is clear that most mouse intestinal bacterial species still remain uncultured.

This paper follows on from the efforts of the Human Microbiome Project, which was established in 2008 with the goal of creating a reference database that would accelerate the characterization of bacterial species native to a specific host. However, the major difference between these two endeavours is in the underlying approach. The Human Microbiome Project focused on metagenomic sequence generation; the collection of strains was a relatively minor component6,7, while the miBC focuses on isolating cultures — traditionally seen as hard to achieve for the vast majority of bacterial species. This approach has the functional advantage of allowing in vitro experimentation and the computational advantage of simplifying metagenomic analysis, including analysis of culturable but rare species.

This thoroughly documented and reliable whole genome collection will enable enhanced multi-omic integration via read mapping (for example, community profiling of shallow shotgun metagenomics, metabolomics, proteomics, and metatranscriptomics). Furthermore, it will be a critical underpinning for systems biology and modelling efforts aimed at identifying the relationship between the microbiome and diet, lifestyle or a particular disease state. Given the vast potential unlocked by this method of microbiome cataloguing, it is tempting to extend this approach to other organisms. Evidence of coevolution and microbiome–host specificity makes these databases critical for functional experimentation and analysis. As techniques for isolating microorganisms improve and sequencing costs drop, it may be relevant to perform similar cataloguing techniques on individual samples, and to increase inclusion of non-bacterial microorganisms (that is, archaea, fungi, protists, and viruses). The clarity of this singular effort by Lagkouvardos and co-workers is motivation for other labs to contribute to host-specific, publicly available, biorepositories for the advancement of metagenomic interpretation and manipulation, and pushes us toward a future where our ability to ‘look it up in our gut’ is much more attainable.


