Ancient human oral plaque preserves a wealth of biological data

A new study explores the ancient oral microbiome from the well-preserved dental calculus samples of four human individuals who lived during medieval times, using a suite of genomic, proteomic and microscopic approaches. The authors investigate the evolution of dental pathogens by reconstructing the genome of the periodontal pathogen Tannerella forsythia and also identify antibiotic resistance genes, bacterial virulence factors and host immune defense proteins.

Humans have a love-hate relationship with their microscopic inhabitants. Although bacteria have essential roles in our nutrition, development and the function of our immune system, they also can cause disease. The human oral microbiome is a complex ecosystem that has clear health benefits1,2,3 but can also cause life-threatening disease states4,5. The human oral microbiome has likely experienced major changes over the last few thousand years as humans transitioned from hunter-gatherer to agricultural and then industrial lifestyles. This transition in lifestyle is associated with major changes in diet and hygiene and, more recently, with the use of antibiotics. Understanding how the human oral microbiome has changed in concert with human cultural transitions is essential for understanding what defines a healthy state and for identifying possible sources of modern oral microbiome dysbiosis. For example, is periodontal disease an affliction that has remained constant through time or are modern forms of this disease relatively new in human history? How have the genomes of periodontal pathogens evolved since the widespread use of antibiotics? On page 336 of this issue, Christina Warinner and colleagues6 report high-resolution characterization of the oral microbiome from the dental tissues of four adult skeletons with periodontal disease dating to c. 950–1200 CE. This rich data set, which includes a reconstruction of the genome of the periodontal pathogen T. forsythia, provides a first opportunity to address these questions by directly comparing ancient and modern oral microbiomes.

The ancestral human oral microbiome

There are currently two ways to reconstruct the ancestral states of the human oral microbiome, which involve (i) studying the oral microbiome of modern remote communities living relatively ancestral lifestyles, such as hunter-gather or rural, remote human populations, and (ii) directly sampling the preserved oral microbiome of our human ancestors using ancient DNA recovery approaches. Both methods present significant challenges in accessing samples and are subject to important limitations. However, these approaches are complementary in making inferences about the ancestral state of the human oral microbiome and its functions. With a parallel goal of understanding the ancestral human gut microbiome, a limited number of studies have recently characterized the gut microbiome of remote, rural human populations7,8 and the gut microbiome preserved in ancient human fecal samples9,10, identifying dramatic differences compared to the gut microbiome of humans today living in Western populations. Similar studies of the human oral microbiome have been extremely limited thus far11,12. Demonstrating the feasibility of using ancient dental material, a recent study of the bacteria preserved in the dental calculus (hardened oral plaque; Fig. 1) of 34 ancient European humans demonstrated a loss of diversity in oral bacteria and an increase in the prevalence of disease-causing bacteria with the onset of the Industrial Revolution.

Warinner and colleagues6 now characterize the oral microbime on the basis of biomolecules extracted from the dental calculus of four individuals who lived in the medieval town of Dalheim, Germany, and suffered mild to severe periodontal disease. In a dedicated ancient DNA facility, the authors removed dental plaque from the teeth of each skeleton using a dental scalar (similar to a pick) and extracted DNA and proteins from a coarsely ground sample of combined supra- and subgingival plaque. DNA was sequenced using shotgun metagenomics, not only capturing the taxonomic profile of bacteria using the standard 16S rRNA gene as a taxonomic marker, but also identifying over 40 putative pathogens and antibiotic resistance genes and reconstructing a near-complete genome of the pathogen T. forsythia. Warinner and colleagues6 used the full suite of biomolecules trapped in dental plaque by also sequencing bacterial and human proteins, which provided insight into bacterial virulence and the host immune response. DNA and protein sequencing were complemented by spectroscopy, microscopy and isotope analyses to confirm and provide context for the results.

Warinner and colleagues6 discover that, whereas some pathogens show an increase in abundance at the onset of the Industrial Revolution12, the human oral cavity has been a reservoir for pathogens at least since medieval times (Fig. 1). Interestingly, resistance genes for tetracycline, which are present in the modern reference T. forsythia genome, were absent in the reconstruction of the ancient T. forsythia genome, highlighting the evolutionary pressures exerted by antibiotics on our modern oral microbiome. However, analysis of the shotgun-sequenced DNA did suggest that antibiotic resistance genes and gene transfer machinery were present in the ancient human oral ecosystem. Consequently, these data demonstrate that, although the potential for antibiotic resistance was present in medieval times, resistance genes were likely less prevalent in pathogen genomes then than they are today, presumably owing to the lack of widespread use of antibiotics in medieval times. Warinner and colleagues6 also discovered virulence genes and proteins used by bacteria to evade the host immune system, as well as host immune factors likely involved in maintaining bacterial community abundances. Overall, this report demonstrates the vast amount of biological information that is preserved in the plaque of teeth. The authors even attribute a small number of sequences to preserved food biomolecules. With only three reads diagnostically matching the mitochondrial DNA of potential food resources, these results should be confirmed by additional targeted genetic studies, yet the potential for directly identifying the diet of our ancestors through the analysis of dental calculus is substantial, as evidenced by the presence of entrapped tissue, starch and fiber microfossils6.

Dental calculus as a time capsule

Ancient dental calculus has enormous potential for analysis in future studies by acting as a time capsule, facilitating the study of ancient pathogen evolution and antibiotic resistance and allowing the reconstruction of a healthy ancestral oral microbiome. As Warinner and colleagues6 note, dental calculus is likely an excellent resource for studying the genome evolution of pathogens. In particular, this resource seems ripe for whole-genome sequencing of pathogenic bacteria using enrichment techniques that target specific taxa. This strategy has been successful in targeting the ancient pathogens responsible for diseases such as plague13,14 and cholera15 recovered from bone and preserved tissue, respectively. Furthermore, comparison of ancient dental plaque samples recovered from healthy teeth with samples collected from healthy modern remote hunter-gatherer communities might also provide insight into the diversity of potential commensals that may have been lost in Western populations owing to intensive hygiene practices and the widespread use of antibiotics. Currently, these studies are limited, but as they emerge we will gain a better understanding of the ancestral human oral microbiome and whether today's oral microbiomes represent an enhancement or a degradation of this microbial ecosystem.
