In this short paper Gross and Bhattacharya elaborate on their previous publications about the origin of organellar targeting during early eukaryote evolution. Although there is not much new information in this paper, I support publication, because the authors address specific criticism in a recent Opinion article appeared in Science about their scenario (ref. [5]). This is a good opportunity to elaborate these arguments, and I would like to contribute to it with some comments.
I think that the authors have to be more specific about the use of the terms 'outsiders' and 'insiders' hypothesis'. The problem is that they confound three very different questions. The first question is whether the components of the organellar targeting machineries have an origin from the symbiont's or the host's genome.
The second is whether during the conversion of the symbiont into an organelle the first steps entailed changes in OM components or the IM/matrix components of the symbiont.
The third question is whether the mutational changes occurred in the host or mitochondrial genome.
There are many combinations of the possible answers to these three questions. Various combinations have been proposed in various models in the literature. These distinctions have to be clarified in the text. Once it is done, it is clear that the differences between the authors' model and other models are not so clear-cut. Therefore the authors cannot lump all other models together as "insiders' models" and then argue against all of them at the same time.
To give an example, the model by Cavalier-Smith [ref. [15]] agrees in many points with the authors' model. He also proposed for example that Tom20, Tom22, Sam37 and mitochondrial carriers originated and evolved in the host genome.
The major difference between Cavalier-Smith' model and the model by Gross and Bhattacharya regards the first steps in the process (carriers insertion versus Tom40 and SAM50 self-insertion into the OM). I can see the merits of the first solution (immediate selective advantage of ATP/ADP or other exchanges), but I don't see the advantage to the host of exchanging the OM beta-barrel proteins (this was also not discussed in the authors' Nat Rev Genet paper ref. [1]). Could it have been advantageous for the control of transport, or organelle division? I am just guessing, but this point could be elaborated in this manuscript. I would argue that the first steps had to involve a mechanism to control or tap the evolving organelle, and I don't see the solution from a pure outsider (OM targeting first) perspective.
In the conclusions the authors state that: "what were the selective advantages conferred to the endosymbiont that led it to relinquish autonomy by importing host-proteins to manipulate its biochemistry?" This is not a valid question in this context. Once the symbiont had established an obligatory presence in the host, selection acted at the level of the consortium (host+symbiont) as a unit. It is therefore conceivable that certain mutations in the organellar genome were fixed, even if such mutations would have harmed a free-living cell or a facultative symbiont. If mutations in the organellar genome for example changed the properties of the OM pores and made it easier for the host to insert carriers and thereby increase the fitness of the consortium, such mutations could have spread. Nevertheless I acknowledge the other valid arguments on why the symbiont's genome was likely not contributing with major innovations during the process.
In the section "Organellar protein topogenesis" the authors mention de novo provenance from non-coding DNA as a potential source of new genes. A cautionary note here: it is more likely that these proteins evolved from preexisting proteins and diverged beyond recognition, rather than evolved de novo. It is in general very difficult to evolve folded proteins from scratch.

