This paper presents an interesting new hypothesis about the origin of eukaryotes. The authors work out a scenario in which accumulating oxygen and ROS plays a major driving factor during the rise of eukaryotes, including the origin of key cellular features such as the endomembrane system. There are many interesting ideas in the paper, it is cell biologically feasible, and it is well written.

One of my concerns is if the paleontological record can tell us anything about the role of oxygen as a causative agent in eukaryote origins, given the extremely broad possible time span for the event (the authors write 2.7-1.7 Gya). The evidence is convincing in the case of the Ediacaran fauna, but unfortunately we lack such evidence for eukaryotes.
However, given the many ancestral oxygenic cell biological features of eukaryotes (peroxisomes, respiration etc.) it is clear that we have to consider an oxygenic world. But then, if oxygen was driving the changes globally and for a billion years, why was it only one lineage that developed internal membranes to prevent ROS damage?

More generally, one thing that this scenario doesn't provide is a unique event (cf. the origin of mitochondria or the origin of the first phagotrophic cell) that makes eukaryotes successful. It may be an error to single out one factor to explain the origin of eukaryotes. It is probably the same trap that 'phagocytosis only' and 'mitochondria only' scenarios can easily fall into. My feeling is that in future models we will have to understand the synergies between mitochondria and phagocytosis in an emerging oxygenic world.
The authors posit a fully developed archaebacterial cell as the ancestor of eukaryotes. They should point out that this is far from being a resolved issue. Archaebacteria are often shown as sisters to eukaryotes in sequence trees in which case their last common ancestor need not have been an archaebacterium.
The discussion about the origin of mitochondria and phagocytosis is too speculative and follows an unfortunate trend in the literature. One can just as well say that the archaebacterial proto-cytoskeleton with Arp2/3 and the ability to fuse already worked as a primitive phagocytic machinery. At this point it would be fairer to say that we simply don't know. It will not take away anything from the hypothesis.
The literature on the role of oxygen in eukaryote evolution and compartmentalization should be covered more extensively. Important papers on the subject are not mentioned including Nature 445,47 (2006) or BBRC 363, 885 (2007).

Other hypotheses about the driving forces behind the origin of the nucleus should be mentioned, including: Nature 440, 41 (2006); Biol Direct 3, 31 (2008); Biol Direct 5, 7 (2010). It should also be pointed out that a role for biofilms and syntrophy in the origin of eukaryotes has already been proposed: J Mol Evol 47, 517 (1998); Nat Rev Genet 8, 395 (2007); Biol Direct 2, 3 (2007).