This interesting paper describes two novel families related to the filament forming FtsZ/tubulin proteins. The identification of these novel families and the careful analyses of the sequences already warrant publication. Besides, the authors also provide useful information about the genomic context of the novel FtsZ-like proteins and propose that they may be involved in membrane remodeling processes.

This is a very interesting possibility, but I think that it is very difficult to decide based on the data, and there are also alternative interpretations possible. Regarding the membrane remodeling complexes formed by OmpA-like proteins, von Willebrand factor type A domain proteins and FtsZ-like proteins, it is unclear in what cellular context these could function together. Looking at the genomic context data in their AF5 supplementary table, it is clear that many of the FtsZl1 genes, in gram-negatives at least, are associated with periplasmic and outer-membrane components. OmpA-like proteins are outer membrane proteins. Several of the proteins containing a von Willebrand factor type A domain have a signal peptide and are likely periplasmic (I only checked Corynebacterium glutamicum cgR_2627, Bacillus thuringiensis konkukian BT9727_3336 and Micromonospora sp. ATCC 39149 MCAG_00589, these all have a signal peptide). On the contrary, the FtsZl1 protein is likely cytoplasmic. Given the different subcellular localizations, which of the two membranes could be remodeled in Gram-negatives? A cytoplasmic FtsZ-like protein will not form a complex with periplasmic and outer-membrane proteins. Given this problem, it would be very useful to provide the predicted cellular localization (cytoplasm, outer membrane etc.) for all of the proteins listed in the supplementary table AF5 and Figure ​Figure2C2C.
It would be very useful to see a discussion about whether these novel proteins are likely to form filaments, a property necessary for membrane remodeling activity. Could the additional C-terminal domains hinder filament formation? Besides, FtsZl1 lacks the T6-H7 structural elements. How does it fit to the known structure of the FtsZ filaments?
Given these difficulties with the functional predictions, I would suggest to change the title and the abstract and to provide a more careful discussion of the possible function of these proteins.
Glancing through the genomic context data, I would propose, as an alternative to the authors' interpretation, that FtsZl1 proteins may have a role in transmembrane transport and/or signalling processes. For example in Polaromonas naphthalenivorans the FtsZl1 protein is associated with Pnap_3259 (TRAP-type uncharacterized transport system protein, periplasmic component). This protein has a signal sequence and a domain similar to the periplasmic binding proteins (PBP), components of Tripartite ATP-independent periplasmic (TRAP) transporter systems. In Pirellula staleyi FtsZl1 is associated with Psta_0487, a diguanylate phosphodiesterase, involved in cyclic diguanylic acid (c-di-GMP) signalling, regulating e.g. motility, biofilm formation and virulence. In Thermosynechococcus elongatus FtsZl1 is associated with tll1019, a PilA-like protein, involved in the general secretion pathway for extracellular targeting of proteins from the periplasm. In Bacteroides capillosus FtsZl1 is associated with BACCAP_04120, an OEP family (Outer membrane efflux protein) with a signal peptide and periplasmic localization. In Arthrospira platensis FtsZl1 is associated with AplaP_010100009370, the periplasmic component of an ABC-type branched-chain amino acid transport system. There are also other examples that suggest a transport function.