This interesting paper by Yutin et al. addresses one of the most important and hotly debated issues about the origin of eukaryotes, namely the origin of phagocytosis.

It is now clear that the last common ancestor of eukaryotes was able to perform phagocytosis, and possessed essentially all the characteristic eukaryotic organelles, including mitochondria. The debate is about whether phagotrophy or mitochondria came first. Since both evolved in the stem lineage leading to modern eukaryotes, the order of origins is problematic. Cell biological considerations rather favor a phagotrophic host for the mitochondrium, but there are also strong advocates for the alternative.

One way to test the two models would by a thorough phylogenetic analysis of the proteins involved in phagocytosis. If most of these proteins turned out to be of alpha-proteobacterial origin, this would favor the mitochondrium-first scenario. Conversely, if most proteins were similar to ones found in archaebacteria, the sister lineage to the eukaryotic host, the phagotrophy-first scenario would gain support.

Yutin et al. try to resolve the issue exactly this way. In my opinion, however, they fail to find a conclusive answer, or more precisely, the data fail to yield a clear support for either scenario. The solution they propose is somewhat arbitrary, at least if we want to conclude something strictly based on the data presented. I will explain why I think this is the case.

The presence of the closest relatives of actin and actin-like proteins in some archaebacteria (the most important finding of the paper!) is consistent with many scenarios. It is clear that these proteins, even if they formed branched filaments, don't make the archaebacteria that possess them phagotrophic, not even in the inefficient way as presented in the authors' scenario. So their scenario is based on, again, cell biological speculations, namely that the host cell had to lose its cell wall and had to evolve a primitive form of phagotrophy before the mitochondrial symbiosis. Even though I would agree with such a conclusion, based on cell biological speculation, I don't think it follows from the data. I of course agree with the authors that the alternative, the lack of close actin-homologs in archaebacteria, and their presence in alpha-proteobacteria would be a very strong argument against the phagotrophy-first scenario, but they didn't find this. The history of actin therefore does not resolve the issue.

Regarding the small GTPases, it seems to support the mitochondria-early scenario, but I am afraid that the correct interpretation of this tree is difficult, and depends on when and in which direction the putative HGT events took place. The proteins are present in both eu- and archaebacteria, and could have come both ways. It is also a formal possibility that the two major eukaryotic small GTPase groups were transferred early on into different prokaryotes. So, again, it is hard to make a strong conclusion.

However, all of the above does not mean that the authors' scenario is uninteresting and not worth pursuing!

I have another problem regarding the independent origin of advanced phagocytosis in different eukaryotic groups. I think it is unjustified. First of all, there are many near-universal factors (29 proteins conserved in 4 out of 5 species), as identified by the comparative proteomic study. These proteins include the core actin nucleation, branching and polymerization machinery (Arp2/3, actin, myosin, Rabs etc.). I think this can equally be interpreted the opposite way, namely that the core machinery is remarkably conserved. The authors compare the phagosome proteome to the spliceosome and the NPC, but I don't think these are the best choice, since both are multiprotein complexes, and not membrane compartments/processes. It would be more informative to compare phagosome conservation for example to the conservation of endosome or peroxisomes proteome. By the way, the low conservation of the Entamoeba phagosome proteome among different strains also is contrary to the authors' argument. According to the same logic, these different Entamoeba strains evolved advanced phagocytosis three times independently. Adding to this, the fact that there is no conserved phagocytosis receptor only indicates that these organisms phagocytose very different things, for which different receptors are needed. All in all, the divergence of the proteomes is most likely due to evolutionary divergence and the differences in methodology. I think it is still a very safe conclusion that the eukaryotic common ancestor was an advanced phagotroph with actin-based protrusion, prey uptake and acidification by V-ATPase. If all this basic cell biology is not, then what would be considered as conserved?

The authors state, that "plants cells are not phagocytic". This is mostly true (one exception is the prasinophyte green alga with surface scales cited in [104], however plants originated when a biciliate host phagocytosed a cyanobacterium. So the plant lineage is also ancestrally phagocytic.
"To date no phagocytosis has been reported in fungi". One exception is the basal fungus Rozella allomycis, which can phagocytose organelles of its host [31].
Rhizaria can also be phagotrophic (e.g. some Foraminifera).