This paper describes a simple computational model for quorum sensing and a switch to swarming behaviour in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The paper is interesting and well written. The most important finding is that under certain conditions it is possbile to obtain a moving „activation zone" of swarming cells that moves towards nutrients without invoking directional response, such as chemotaxis. My question is whether such conditions are met in real life, in particular the diffusion coefficients used. In the model the activation zone moves in one direction, because the nutrients are depleted behind the front. The extent of such depletion will be influenced by the diffusion constant of the nutrients. If nutrient diffusion is fast with respect to cell division rates and swarming rates, then I suspect that the activation zone will not move towards the source of nutrients and the model fails. I think it would therefore be important to test different diffusion constants for the nutrients and see whether the parameters which are able to maintain directional swarming, using realistic cell doubling times and swarming speed, are near the real values in tissues or agar plates.
The simulations are performed in a 2D longitudinal track (a surface of a slender cylinder), which is almost in 1D. This approach has certainly its merit, especially when measuring the advancement of the active zone. However, if the model is correct, it should also reproduce the dendritic colony morphologies when extended to two dimensions. Using the computational framework such an extension seems to be straightforward, just the modelled area should be increased. I presume that dendritic morphologies develop because cells move randomly and the initiated advancing fronts deplete the nutrients around them.
The model assumes a threshold signal concentration to activate the quorum sensing response. Has this been demonstrated experimentally before? If not, it would be easy to test such threshold response using the swarming experiments in the SN mutants, using different concentrations of the signal.