The WWE domain: a common interaction module in protein ubiquitination and ADP ribosylation

Abstract
Sequence profile analysis was used to detect a conserved globular domain in several proteins including deltex, Trip12 and poly-ADP-ribose polymerase homologs. It was named the WWE domain after its most conserved residues and is predicted to mediate specific protein–protein interactions in ubiquitin and ADP-ribose conjugation systems.

Keywords
WWE domainubiquitinADP ribosylation

Keywords
BiochemistryCell biology

Ubiquitination is a ubiquitous regulatory mechanism in eukaryotes that is involved in signal transduction 1 and in targeting proteins for degradation. Conjugation of ubiquitin and related peptides to proteins is mediated by an enzymatic cascade of three serial steps catalyzed by E1, E2 andE3 enzymes. The E3s are the most diverse and most often contain HECT (homologous to E6-AP carboxyl terminus) or RING domains. The former forms a covalent link with ubiquitin before transfer to the substrate–protein, whereas the latter probably acts as an adaptor that directs the transfer of ubiquitin from the E2 enzyme to a target 1, 2, 3, 4. Here, I describe a previously undetected module that is found in different E3-related proteins with either the HECT or the RING domain, and also in a novel family of poly-ADP ribose polymerases (PARPs) 5. It is predicted that this module mediates the interactions of these proteins with signaling complexes.

The deltex protein, a positive regulator of the Notch signaling pathway, contains a specific version of the RING domain (RING-H2) at its C-terminus 6. This suggests that deltex is a potential component of E3 similar to other RING-H2 proteins such as APC11 (Ref. 7). Additionally, deltex interacts genetically with Su(deltex), which encodes a HECT-domain-containing E3 ligase; this interaction supports a role for deltex in the ubiquitin-dependent regulation of Notch signaling 8. The N-terminal globular region of deltex contains two divergent sequence repeats of ∼80 amino acids each. To investigate their evolutionary conservation and potential connection to the ubiquitin system, I carried out a PSI-BLAST search 9 of the non-redundant protein database (National Center for Biotechnology Information) with each of these repeats with an expect (E) value threshold of 0.01 for inclusion into the profile, iterated till convergence. These searches recovered similar regions from the vertebrate deltex homologs, some uncharacterized proteins and TRIP12, avertebrate HECT-domain-containing E3 ubiquitin ligase (Fig. 1). Further PSI-BLAST searches with a profile that included all the above recovered sequences detected this region in several RING-finger proteins from animals and a novel sub-family of PARP homologs from humans and Arabidopsis thaliana with statistically significant E values (Fig. 1). These observations suggest that this conserved region defines a novel globular domain that is present in a variety of distinct contexts in several different proteins. A multiple sequence alignment of this domain shows two conserved Trp (W) residues and a Glu (E) residue (Fig. 1); accordingly, it was named the WWE domain.

Secondary-structure prediction using PHD (Ref. 10) and PSI-PRED (Ref. 11) suggests the presence of multiple β strands that correspond to the conserved N- and C-terminal motifs of this domain that are enriched in hydrophobic or aromatic residues (Fig. 1). There is a single prominent helix that corresponds to the central motif containing the conserved Glu (Fig. 1). The secondary-structure pattern with a two-strand hairpin at the N-terminus followed by a helix is reminiscent of theβ-grasp fold adopted by ubiquitin andseveral other eukaryote-specific α/βdomains 12.

The WWE domains occur in two functional classes of proteins, namely those associated with ubiquitination and those associated with poly-ADP ribosylation. The former class includes its combinations with the HECT-type E3 ligases (e.g. Trip12), the classic RING or the RING-H2 domains (e.g. several animal proteins such as C02B8.6 from Caenorhabditis elegans and deltex homologs), and the ubiquitin-binding UBA domain 13 (e.g. CG8184-like proteins from Drosophila melanogaster and Homo sapiens) (Fig. 2). The region precisely encompassing the two WWE domains in D. melanogaster deltex is necessary and sufficient for its interaction with the ankyrin repeats of Notch as well as the rescue of certain deltex alleles 14. The Trip12 protein that also contains a WWE domain interacts with the ligand-binding domains of the thyroid hormone and retinoid (RXR) receptors 15. Analogous to the ubiquitin ligases, eukaryotic PARPs covalently modify proteins through the addition of multiple ADP-ribose moieties and participate in functions such as DNA repair and chromatin dynamics 5, 16. The WWE domain is present in either single or duplicate copies in a novel sub-family of PARPs, thus far found only in vertebrates and plants. These proteins are distinct from the previously described PARPs that combine their catalytic domains with a variety of adapter domains such as zinc fingers, SAP, Ankyrin, BRCT, vWA and SAM (Refs 17, 18, 19, 20). These observations suggest that the WWE domains function in specific interactions with other proteins and could help in targeting the different kinds of E3-like and ADP-ribosylation activities to proteins participating in various signaling cascades. This also raises the interesting possibility that the ubiquitin ligases and PARPs bind the same targets through their respective WWE domains and decorate them with alternative modifications resulting in different functional consequences.

The identification of the WWE domain in diverse proteins with predicted ubiquitin- and ADP-ribosylation-related functions could aid in the experimental dissection of the interactions of these proteins.

