Exploring histones and their relatives with the Histone Sequence Database

Histones perform the remarkable feat of compressing up to few meters of eukaryotic DNA containing closely spaced negative charges into a nuclear compartment of just a few microns in diameter. They do this by forming a nucleosome – the basic unit of the chromosome comprising eight histone molecules around which approximately 150 base pairs of DNA are wrapped. Consistent with this role, they are amongst most highly conserved proteins in eukaryotes. Histones H2A, H2B, H3 and H4, which form the core of the nucleosome, possess the same basic structure, with a globular head and a non-globular tail that is enriched in positive charges. In contrast, histone H1 binds inter-nucleosomal segments and, along with the non-globular parts of the core histones, probably helps in higher-order chromosomal organization1.

Over the years studies on histones have revealed several interesting functions and properties. Given the widespread interest in histones, and chromatin dynamics in general, it is entirely reasonable that there is a World-Wide Web resource devoted to these proteins. Such a resource is provided by the ‘Histone Sequence Database’ (http://genome.nhgri.nih.gov/histones/)2. Table 1 shows the different areas covered by the database and, in this article, I will describe briefly some of its possible uses. While the histones are highly conserved proteins, several have different isoforms in each organism. A researcher can rapidly determine the particular isoform he or she is dealing with, with the help of the search engine on the database. This is useful as databases such as Genbank have a large number of redundant entries for histones, making it difficult to pick the correct representative from a given organism. The chromosomal locations and links to the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database are also provided for the human histones3. Several discrepancies in the histone sequences from the NR database are also noted and clarified in the Histone Sequence Database.

It is clear that the common structure shared by the globular head of the core histones, namely the a-helical histone fold, also occurs by numerous regulators of transcription, including some of the TATA-binding-protein-associated proteins or TAFs (Ref. 4). Thus, the principles of the interactions between histones and proteins and DNA also apply to the formation of the basal-transcription and DNA-replication complexes. Furthermore, homologs of the core histones that package DNA also occur in the euryarchaea lineage of prokaryotes5. The database provides the user with a detailed list of these histone-related proteins in FASTA format and multiple alignments of several of the individual families as postscript files. Those proteins for which 3-D structures are available can be visualized compared using the NCBI's CN3D viewer.

Exploring this database could be useful for an investigator looking for new problems or seeking to understand chromosomal proteins. For example, included in the list of non-histone proteins that contain the histone fold are the Son of Sevenless proteins, which have a histone fold of the type found within the H2A family (Fig. 1). It is particularly interesting to note that the histone-fold domain is fused to a guanine-nucleotide-exchange factor (GEF) involved in GTPase signaling within the Ras pathway6. While the GEF domain is well characterized in terms of its role in GTPase function, the histone domain has not been investigated. Thus, such information offers potential leads to bench workers, which may not be immediately apparent from their angle of research. For such purposes the user is advised to use the file: http://genome.nhgri.nih.gov/histones/hf_seqs.html, rather than Table 1, which might contain out-dated information. The proteins in this file have been identified using powerful search techniques, such as PSI-BLAST, that detect subtle sequence similarities, followed by expert evaluation of the results.

There is considerable recent excitement about the potential of methylation, acetylation, phosphorylation, ubiquitination and amidation in regulating histone activity7. A list of these potential modifications and the residues they affect (in the primary sequences of each histone) is provided by the Histone Sequence Database. This gives a means of identifying known modifications and factoring them into the search for new modifications that might be carried out by the several newly predicted histone acetylases and methylases, such as the SET domain proteins.

Thus, taken together, The Histone Sequence Database provides material to explore the histones and their relatives. It is especially useful for neophytes wanting to familiarize themselves with this well known and important class of proteins and to chromatin researchers who want to explore specific aspects of histones or related proteins.

