The BED finger, a novel DNA-binding domain in chromatin-boundary-element-binding proteins and transposases

Keywords
Biochemistry Chemical Biology

Keywords
Chromatin-boundary-element-binding proteinsBED fingerDNA binding domainTransposases

Proteins associated with elements such as enhancers and silencers, which are distant from the main promoter, interact with the basal transcription machinery on which they have a positively or negatively regulating effect1. Recently, a specific class of elements termed insulators have been shown to prevent the spread of the effects of the enhancers and silencers across distinct sectors (domains) of the chromatin. This is in part maintained by the antagonistic effects of the chromatinic complexes encoded by the trithorax and polycomb group proteins2. The proteins that bind to these insulator or chromatin boundary elements have been characterized extensively in Drosophila melanogaster and have been shown to localize to numerous chromosomal sites that demarcate sections containing single bands of the polytene chromosome3. Three polypeptides have emerged in these studies – the two alternatively spliced products of the same gene, BEAF-32A and 32B, and the DREF protein4, 5. The DREF protein competes in vivo for binding to overlapping sites with the BEAF proteins, and these have been shown to antagonize each another5. Further, DREF has been shown to be the transcriptional regulator for S-phase genes in Drosophila6, such as the genes for DNA polymerase, PCNA and E2F, which suggests an interesting link between the activation of DNA replication and chromatin insulation.

A visual inspection of the experimentally delineated N-terminal DNA-binding domains of the DREF, BEAF32A and 32B proteins4, 6 showed a shared pattern of cysteines and histidines, which could form a metal-chelating structure, as well as a shared motif with a conserved tryptophan. To understand the relationships between these proteins better, PSI-BLAST searches7 with an inclusion cutoff of 0.01 were initiated with each of the above-mentioned DNA-binding domains as starting queries. These searches retrieved a variety of proteins that included the Dpy-20 protein from Caenorhabditis elegans8, AC1 and Hobo-like transposases9, 10 from animals, plants and fungi, as well as several uncharacterized proteins from different crown-group eukaryotes (i.e. plants, animals and fungi). All these proteins shared a signature of Cx2CxnHx3–5[H/C], with xn a variable spacer that is predicted to form a zinc finger (Fig. 1). Further, N-terminal to this signature they all contain a characteristic motif with two highly conserved aromatic positions (P <10−12, as calculated using the MACAW program). I named the conserved domain containing this N-terminal motif along with the metal-chelating signature the BED finger, after BEAF and DREF. A further search of the nonredundant database with a profile that included the above-mentioned BED-finger domain identified two other plant DNA-binding proteins: 3AF1 from tobacco11 and E4/E8-BP1 from tomato12. However, these proteins contain a large insert between the second pair of metal-chelating residues (Fig. 1). A similar version of the BED domain was also found in one or two copies in the plant TAG1-transposons13.

The presence of DNA-binding ability in diverse BED domains4, 6, 11, 12 suggests that this is the general function of this domain. Secondary-structure prediction using the PHD program14 suggests the formation of β strands by the N-terminal conserved motif with the aromatic residues and the conserved region encompassing the cysteine dyad (Fig. 1). A helix is predicted to be formed by the region associated with the first of the C-terminal chelating histidines. A variable helical region is also predicted between the conserved N-terminal motif and the cysteine dyad (Fig. 1). These structural features and the variable spacing between Zn-chelating residues suggest that the BED fingers are distinct from the classic C2H2 Zn fingers, although they share some general features. A comparison of the three distinct BED fingers from the BEAFs and DREF that bind to the same boundary element sequence suggests that DNA binding is likely to depend on the N-terminal conserved motif, in addition to the conserved segments within the Zn-binding region. Further, most of these proteins possess a region enriched in basic residues N-terminal to the BED domain. It is possible that these residues could form contacts with the minor groove, like the AT-hook does15, whereas the rest of the structure associates with the major groove.

Interestingly, the BED finger is shared by proteins that perform critical cellular functions such as BEAF, DREF and Dpy-20, a predicted cuticular-gene transcriptional regulator (with lethal dumpy phenotypes in C. elegans) and transposases of mobile genomic parasites, like the Hobo-AC1 and TAG1 elements. This is very similar to the sharing of DNA-binding domains such as the MYB/SANT (Ref. 17), Tigger/CENP-B (Ref. 18), Paired19 and other HTH domains, and chromatin-association domains such as the chromodomain20 and PHD finger16 between cellular factors and transposons. In some of these cases it appears that inactive transposases have been recruited by the cell as DNA-binding factors, whereas in other cases it appears that the transposons might have acquired the domain from a cellular gene. Given the widespread presence of the BED finger in distinct transposases distributed over the eukaryotic crown group, it is likely that the domain has been present in the ancestral version of these transposons, although it has subsequently degenerated in several of them. This suggests that the BED finger has been recruited for cellular functions from transposases on two or more independent occasions– in DREF/BEAF, Dpy-20 and in the plant light- and ethylene-regulated DNA-binding proteins 3AF1 and E4/E8-BP1(11, 12).

The link with transposases might provide hints regarding the functional significance of these domains in cellular proteins. The co-evolution of host genome and transposons is likely to select for mechanisms that help insulate the mobile element from host transcription. The insulator elements could serve as binding sites for their transposases or host proteins (as in the gypsy retrotransposon21) that could sequester the associated regions into distinct chromosomal segments. Given that these transposons lack a RNA intermediate, they are also likely to interact with S-phase regulatory genes to regulate their transposition. Hence, the DNA-binding domains of the transposases and their binding sites could have been recruited by the host to regulate its own chromatin structure, transcription- and replication-related genes. Given the widespread distribution and expression [as can be inferred from expressed sequence tag (EST) searches] of the AC-1-like elements in plant and animal genomes, it is possible that their BED-finger proteins have a regular cellular function. In particular, animal and plant proteins that contain multiple BED-finger domains could influence higher-order DNA structure by binding repetitive sequences with several copies of their target sites.

Here, I have identified a novel DNA-binding domain, found thus far in the eukaryotic crown group, in both cellular regulatory factors and transposases. This, taken together with the presence of several chromatin-associated protein domains in transposons supports a significant role for mobile elements in the evolution of chromosomal proteins. The identification of the BED-finger domain in poorly characterized proteins from model organisms such as the C. elegans Dpy-20 and yeast Ygr071cp (Fig. 1) could provide new leads in experimental studies on transcription and chromosome structure.

