Identification of novel components of NAD-utilizing metabolic pathways and prediction of their biochemical functions

Abstract

Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) is a ubiquitous cofactor participating in numerous redox reactions. It is also a substrate for regulatory modifications of proteins and nucleic acids via the addition of ADP-ribose moieties or removal of acyl groups by transfer to ADP-ribose. In this study, we use in-depth sequence, structure and genomic context analysis to uncover new enzymes and substrate-binding proteins in NAD-utilizing metabolic and macromolecular modification systems. We predict that Escherichia coli YbiA and related families of domains from diverse bacteria, eukaryotes, large DNA viruses and single strand RNA viruses are previously unrecognized components of NAD-utilizing pathways that probably operate on ADP-ribose derivatives. Using contextual analysis we show that some of these proteins potentially act in RNA repair, where NAD is used to remove 2′–3′ cyclic phosphodiester linkages. Likewise, we predict that another family of YbiA-related enzymes is likely to comprise a novel NAD-dependent ADP-ribosylation system for proteins, in conjunction with a previously unrecognized ADP-ribosyltransferase. A similar ADP-ribosyltransferase is also coupled with MACRO or ADP-ribosylglycohydrolase domain proteins in other related systems, suggesting that all these novel systems are likely to comprise pairs of ADP-ribosylation and ribosylglycohydrolase enzymes analogous to the DraG–DraT system, and a novel group of bacterial polymorphic toxins. We present evidence that some of these coupled ADP-ribosyltransferases/ribosylglycohydrolases are likely to regulate certain restriction modification enzymes in bacteria. The ADP-ribosyltransferases found in these, the bacterial polymorphic toxin and host-directed toxin systems of bacteria such as Waddlia also throw light on the evolution of this fold and the origin of eukaryotic polyADP-ribosyltransferases and NEURL4-like ARTs, which might be involved in centrosomal assembly. We also infer a novel biosynthetic pathway that might be involved in the synthesis of a nicotinate-derived compound in conjunction with an asparagine synthetase and AMPylating peptide ligase. We use the data derived from this analysis to understand the origin and early evolutionary trajectories of key NAD-utilizing enzymes and present targets for future biochemical investigations.

Introduction

Recent studies by us and others have shown deep evolutionary connections between systems involved in cofactor, amino acid and secondary metabolite biosynthesis and those involved in modifications of proteins and nucleic acids.1–4 For example, the origin of several eukaryotic enzymes that add or remove a methyl group on lysines and arginines in histones and other proteins can be directly traced to bacterial pathways involved in synthesizing peptide-derived antibiotics and siderophores.5 A 2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenase derived from similar bacterial systems has also spawned the wybutosine hydroxylase/peroxidase, an enzyme that introduces a key modification in eukaryotic tRNAPhe.6 In a similar vein, multiple components of the peptide ligation and deubiquitination pathways in the eukaryotic ubiquitin system show evolutionary relationships with enzymes involved in diverse bacterial biosynthetic systems for cofactors (thiamine and molybdopterin), siderophores, antibiotics and the amino acid cysteine.1–3,7–10 Enzymes catalyzing other major forms of peptide tagging of proteins in eukaryotes, e.g. protein polyglutamylation, polyglycination and tyrosinylation also display evolutionary connections to peptide ligases involved in diverse prokaryotic pathways for the biosynthesis of various antibiotics, the amino acid lysine and cofactors like peptidylated tetrahydrosarcinapterin (a folate-like pterin derivative) and F420 (a flavin-like molecule).1 The generality of this theme is further reinforced by the evolutionary links between enzymes catalyzing other forms of peptide tagging of proteins, such as pupylation and protein arginylation/leucylation, and enzymes mediating peptide-bond formation, respectively, in the synthesis of the peptide cofactor glutathione, and a variety of compounds, such as peptidoglycan and peptide-modified lipids.1,11 Thus, the ultimate origin of numerous enzymes involved in covalent modifications of proteins and nucleic acids, particularly in eukaryotic regulatory systems, can be linked to enzymes catalyzing similar reactions in bacterial biosynthetic systems specializing in the production of cofactors, amino acids and metabolites such as antibiotics, siderophores and cell–cell communication molecules.1,2 These studies, in addition to elucidating the evolutionary links between biosynthetic pathways and regulatory modifications of proteins, have contributed considerably in identifying fundamentally new regulatory mechanisms and biosynthetic pathways generating novel metabolites and also uncovering new components of previously known pathways.1–4,7,9

Given these connections, we were interested in understanding the links between the biosynthetic and regulatory pathways centered on the ancient and ubiquitous metabolite, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) or its phosphorylated derivative NADP.12–14 NAD fits particularly well into the above-discussed patterns because it is both a cofactor for numerous enzymes as well as a substrate for numerous protein- and nucleic acid-modifying reactions. As a cofactor it functions as one of the central redox molecules or hydrogen-carriers in the cell for reactions catalyzed by diverse oxidoreductases, usually of the Rossmann fold.7,14 It achieves this by virtue of the facile transition of the nicotinamide ring between hydrogenated and dehydrogenated states. As a substrate in protein and nucleic acid modification it supplies the ADP-ribose moiety for modification of side chains of amino acids such as glutamate, glutamine, lysine, asparagine, cysteine and diphthamide (a modified histidine) and arginine and guanine in DNA15–20 (Fig. 1). The most common superfamily of enzymes that catalyze such reactions unites the ADP-ribosyltransferases (ARTs), which catalyze the transfer of a single ADP-ribose moiety to a target molecule, and polyADP-ribose polymerases/polyADP-ribose transferases (PARPs/PARTs) that transfer multiple such moieties to form branched or straight chain ADP-ribose polymers.16,21,22 PolyADP-ribosylation of glutamate and lysine side chains is an important regulatory modification of eukaryotic chromatin proteins, such as histones, and affects a variety of cellular processes ranging from DNA repair to apoptosis.22,23 MonoADP ribosylation of arginine is also an important modification in eukaryotes, for example, in the regulation of nucleotide-gated ion channels.24 Some of these ARTs have also been shown to be components of regulatory systems of bacteria (e.g. the DraT–DraG system25–27) that modify the activity of proteins such as dinitrogenase reductase by alternative addition and removal of ADP-ribose from an arginine side chain. Several bacterial toxins also use a similar strategy—e.g. the cholera toxin modifies GαsR18728—to alter the behavior of host proteins. Indeed, bacterial toxin ARTs have evolved a wide range of substrates, such as the Bordetella pertussis toxin that modifies cysteine, the Clostridium botulinum C3 toxin that modifies asparagine, the Photorhabdus luminescens toxin that modifies glutamine29 and the Corynebacterium diphtheriae toxin that modifies diphthamide.30 In contrast, the lepidopteran ARTs, such as pierisin, modify the N2 amino group of guanine in DNA to induce apoptosis.23 Another nucleic acid-modifying ART is the RNA 2′-phosphotransferase KptA/Tpt1, a RNA-repair enzyme that transfers the 2′-phosphate, which is generated as a result of tRNA splicing and RNA ligase action, to NAD, resulting in the generation of ADP-ribose 1′′,2′′-cyclic diphosphate (Appr>p) and release of nicotinamide. The rifamycin ART, which is related to above RNA-processing enzyme, instead inactivates the antibiotic by ADP ribosylation of a hydroxyl group on its carbon 23.31

Beyond the ART superfamily, we have recently defined a novel superfamily of potential bacterial regulatory ADP ribosyltransferases prototyped by the TM1506 protein, which belongs to the unrelated deaminase-like fold.32 Another superfamily of structurally unrelated enzymes, the sirtuins (Sir2-like), which contain a Rossmann fold, has also been shown to catalyze monoADP ribosylation of lysines.33–35 A related reaction in cobalamin biosynthesis, namely the transfer of the ribose phosphate group from nicotinate mononucleotide to 5,6-dimethylbenzimidazole has also been previously reported.36 However, these enzymes are better known for their alternative reactions, namely the deacylation (deacetylation, depropionylation, debutyrylation and decrotonylation) of lysines in proteins for which they use NAD as an acceptor to catalyze the deacylation of proteins.37 In the process NAD is split into nicotinamide and O-acylated ADP ribose (OAADPR) (Fig. 1). These deacylation reactions are seen across all the three superkingdoms of life and are particularly important in eukaryotic chromatin in reversing the acyl modifications of histones and transcription factors such as p53.38 In bacteria, they are central to the reversal of the acyl modifications of enzymes such as propionyl-CoA synthetase, which generates the substrate for the acyl modification in the first place.39 Both the free and the ligated ADP-ribose moieties and its various derivatives serve as targets for recognition by specialized binding domains such as the PARP finger, a treble clef domain that binds polyADP ribose,40,41 and the Macro42 and inactive Nudix domains.38 Some Macro domains also function as enzymes that hydrolyze ADP ribose derivatives, such as polyADP ribose chains43 or OAADPR.44 The protein ADP ribosylation systems, in addition to the ARTs, also contain ADP ribose glycohydrolases (ARGs) and polyADP ribose glycohydrolases (PARGs; the above-mentioned Macro domain enzymes) that remove the ADP-ribose moieties from targets by hydrolyzing the glycosidic bonds.25,45,46

In recent years there has been tremendous progress in terms of structural and biochemical understanding of ARTs, PARTs, sirtuins, MACROs and several NAD biosynthesis enzymes. There have also been several efforts in terms of sequence analysis leading to the discovery of novel ART superfamily enzymes19,32,47 and tremendous interest in the connections between NAD metabolism and the dynamics of heterochromatin formation, especially in the context of organismal aging.12,33 Our earlier investigations on the Ub system showed that despite the numerous advances in the studies on well-understood model systems there are several novel facets of the biochemistry and evolution of these systems that can be uncovered from related systems in prokaryotes.1,2,7 Prokaryotes, especially bacteria, offer a good opportunity for this kind of analysis, given their highly diversified metabolic capabilities, availability of large amounts of genome sequence data and the presence of conserved operons that reveal functional interactions between genes involved in the same metabolic pathways.48 Hence, we hoped that a systematic exploration of the connections between NAD metabolism and NAD-utilizing protein-modification and nucleic acid-repair systems might help in uncovering new players and pathways that were not apparent from the studies on the model systems. With this objective, we performed comparative genomic and sequence analyses of NAD-utilizing and synthesizing enzymes. As a consequence, we identify a novel enzymatic fold that appears to have supplied multiple distinct families of proteins implicated in NAD/ADP ribose metabolism in diverse contexts (Table 1). We also identify several novel domains involved in NAD metabolism, potential novel pathways for the degradation of NAD, and the synthesis of an alternative NAD-like molecule with a nicotinamide moiety (Table 1).

Results and discussion
Layout of the core bacterial NAD-centered pyridine nucleotide cycle system

Due to the wide utilization of NAD as a substrate both in protein modifications, and in the case of bacteria in DNA ligation,49 there is an active system with multiple independent routes to regenerate by salvaging the byproducts of its utilization.12,13,50–55 While there is diversity in the NAD-centered pyridine nucleotide cycle across bacteria, especially in terms of the different routes of salvage and overlap with de novo synthesis, the following key enzymes have been recognized as key players in the pathway (Fig. 1):12,13,50–55 (1) a multi-domain carboxylating nicotinate/quinolinate phosphoribosyltransferase (nadC in Fig. 1) capable of synthesizing nicotinate monophosphate ribonucleotide (NaMN) from quinolinic acid during de novo synthesis of NAD; (2) the PncA nicotinamidase that initiates the classical salvage arm of the pathway by catalyzing the hydrolysis of free nicotinamide (NM) to nicotinate (NaM); (3) the nicotinate phosphoribosyltransferase pncB, a TIM barrel enzyme of the NAPRTase family, that transfers a phosphoribosyl moiety to nicotinate thus generating nicotinate d-ribonucleotide (NaMN); (4) a HIGH nucleotidyltransferase (NadD) that adenylates the nucleotide formed in the prior steps using ATP to form the dinucleotide; (5) a PP-loop fold NAD synthase (NadE) that adenylates the carboxyl group of nicotinate using ATP and subsequently ligates it to ammonia to form a nicotinamide moiety. Ammonia for this process might be generated by the action of a nitrilase-like C–N bond hydrolase domain of the NAD synthetase that hydrolyzes the amide group of glutamine.56 (6) The NAD thus formed might be further phosphorylated by the NAD kinase, an enzyme with a diacylglycerol kinase-like fold, on the 2′-phosphate of the adenosine ribose to give rise to NADP. (7) The NAD or nicotinate dinucleotide is finally degraded by the action of a Nudix superfamily enzyme, the NAD pyrophosphatase, to release AMP. Other than the classical Preiss–Handler pathway outlined above, alternative pathways for salvage of NAD exist in a number of lineages. Known examples include the relatively rare non-deamidating routes, like the salvage of nicotinamide in F. tularensis that is performed by combined activity of a nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (nadV) and a NMN adenylyltransferase (NadM, in some lineages is also a NaMN adenyltransferase),12,52 or the salvage of ribosylnicotinamide (RNm) by the bifunctional N-ribosylnicotinamide kinase/NMN adenylyltransferase NadR and its associated RNm transporter PnuC13,53 found in enterobacteriaceae and some other bacteria. In F. tularensis, the enzyme NMN synthetase, a paralog of NadE, provides a unique path for de novo synthesis of NAD from tryptophan in the absence of NadD via the amidation of NaMN.13,53 In Archaea, NAD metabolism exhibits a lower degree of variability than in Bacteria, with de novo synthesis of NAD, when present, proceeding from aspartate to NAD via NaMN and salvage of nicotinamide and/or nicotinate almost always following a deamidating pathway that relies on a single domain NaNM/NMN adenyltransferase of the NadM family.13 Eukaryotes, on the other hand, may possess a much more extensive array of NAD biosynthetic pathways than those of Archaea, including the synthesis of NAD from tryptophan (vertebrates) or aspartate (plants), the classical Preiss–Handler deamidating salvage pathway, non-deamidating pathways via nicotinamide or nicotinate phosphoribosyltransferases and the pyridine nucleoside salvage.13 While the core NAD system, outlined above, has been fairly well characterized in terms of conservation and structural features in diverse organisms (e.g. see ref. 12, 13 and 50–54), the accumulating data on the phyletic variation of such systems among organisms piqued our interest. In particular we hoped to utilize the genomic data to search for novel domains, which might be functionally associated with these enzymes that could provide leads pertaining to unexplored aspects of NAD metabolism (Table 1).

Comparative genomics reveals novel players in NAD metabolism

Identification and characterization of the NADAR domain  In most bacteria a subset of the genes encoding enzymes belonging to the above-discussed core of NAD metabolism might be linked together to form one or more NAD biosynthesis operons. We used these operons and any potential domain fusions as a starting point to identify potential novel functional linkages. As a result, we detected a previously uncharacterized domain fused to the N-terminus of a NAD synthetase homolog (NadE) from Ruminococcus albus (GI: 325680741, residues 1–148). BLAST searches with this uncharacterized N-terminal domain established its relationship with E. coli YbiA (e-value: 10−14), which is annotated as a domain of unknown function (DUF1768) in the PFAM database.57 Further transitive PSI-BLAST searches revealed that this domain is widespread in several distinct bacterial, eukaryotic and viral lineages (ESI†). Interestingly, we detected this domain across several unrelated or distantly related viruses, which include ssRNA nidoviruses (e.g. Gill-associated virus and yellow head virus of shrimps), and several large DNA viruses namely, iridoviruses (e.g. Invertebrate iridovirus 3), ascoviruses (Diadromus pulchellus ascovirus 4a), Acanthamoeba polyphaga mimivirus and certain caudate bacteriophages (e.g. phage T4). Some of the viral versions, such as those typified by the T4 phage gp30.3 protein, have been previously classified in the PFAM database as an uncharacterized family labeled as “Phage_30_3”. Thus, our searches established that the DUF1768, the Phage_30_3 and several previously uncharacterized versions can be unified into a single superfamily prototyped by E. coli YbiA. Additional iterative searches initiated with the gp30.3 from enterobacteriophage RB43 (GI: 66391541) not only confirmed the relationship of the DUF1768/gp30.3 families, but also recovered hits with border-line statistical significance (e ≈ .017; fourth iteration) from bacteria and phages, which displayed the same highly conserved motif as that found in the above YbiA-like proteins (Fig. 2). A search initiated with the best matching member of this set of divergent sequences (Kitasatospora setae KSE_10250, gi: 311894452) recovered several additional homologs from diverse bacteria, eukaryotes and bacteriophages (e.g. Ralstonia phage RSL1). Interestingly, we observed homologous proteins in several distinct amoeboid eukaryotes (e.g. the heterolobosean Naegleria gruberi and the slime molds Dictyostelium fasciculatum and Polysphondylium pallidum) and the large nucleo-cytoplasmic DNA viruses (NCLDVs) that infect amoebae namely, the Lausannevirus and Marseillevirus. Profile–profile alignments of Hidden Markov Models (HMM) using HHpred confirmed the relationship between these proteins and the YbiA-like proteins (p = 10−12; 96.27% probability). This indicated that in addition to the originally defined YbiA-like proteins the superfamily also contains a second major group defined by the proteins recovered in the above-described searches.

Given the potential association with NAD metabolism we named this superfamily of domains the NADAR superfamily (due to its linkage to “NAD and ADP-ribose”). Both multiple sequence alignments (Fig. 2) and similarity based clustering using the BLASTCLUST program indicated that the two groups defined two distinct families within the NADAR superfamily. We named the first family including YbiA and the phage gp30.3 proteins the YbiA family, while we termed the second one the BC4488 family after an exemplar from Bacillus cereus (gi: 30022528). A NMR structure of YbiA protein produced by the Northeast Structural Genomics program (pdb: 2b3w) provided us a structural template for refining and interpreting the multiple alignment of the NADAR superfamily (Fig. 2). The NADAR domain displays a unique fold, which is dominated by an array of five core helices flanked by two small sheets, each with a couple of strands. Three sequence motifs are present across the superfamily: (1) a “hSph” signature (where “p” is polar and “h” is hydrophobic) at the C-terminus of an isolated 310 helix occurring after the first strand; (2) the “ExhhbxxK” motif which is characteristic for the superfamily (where “s” is a small and “b” a bulky residue, typically glutamine) in the first α-helix; (3) a highly conserved charged residue in the last strand which is almost always a histidine in gp30.3-like proteins, a glutamate in the rest of the YbiA family, and an aspartate in the BC4488 family (Fig. 2). Mapping of the conserved residues onto the structure of YbiA shows that most of them constitute a network of hydrophobic or polar contacts around a central cavity that are likely to stabilize the fold (Fig. 2; e.g., the acid residue in the last strand shares a hydrogen bond with the serine residue of the first motif). However, some residues, like the characteristic conserved lysine of the second motif, have their side chains exposed inside the cavity. These features suggest that the NADAR domain might possess the ability to bind small molecule ligands and either function as a binding protein or an enzyme in the context of NAD metabolism.

The YbiA family and NAD utilization  We utilized contextual information from gene neighborhoods and domain architectures to further test the hypothesis of the involvement of NADAR domains in NAD metabolism and to better understand their functions (Fig. 3). As a result, we found that the YbiA family of NADAR domains is most frequently associated in predicted operons with a gene encoding the enzyme RNA 2′-phosphotransferase (KptA/Tpt1), which in the archaeo-eukaryotic lineage “cleans up” spliced tRNAs by transferring the 2′-phosphate to NAD (Fig. 1). While the conventional bacterial tRNA maturation process does not require KptA, the enzyme can catalyze the same reaction as its archaeo-eukaryotic cognates in vitro and complement knockouts of the homologous TPT1 in yeast.58 This association is also recapitulated in certain eukaryotes, e.g. the basal member of the animal-lineage Capsaspora owczarzaki (gi: 320163643; Fig. 3), where the YbiA domain is combined in the same polypeptide as the KptA module, though they are separated by intervening leucine-rich repeats. YbiA family members are also frequently associated (both those with and without an associated KptA-like gene; Fig. 3) with a gene coding for a Nudix phosphohydrolase, which is most closely related to the ADP-ribose pyrophosphatases that catalyze the hydrolysis of the NAD derivative ADP-ribose to AMP and ribose-5-phosphate59 (Fig. 1). In several bacteria these predicted operons extend further to include other genes coding for one or more enzymes such as nicotinamidase, ribose-phosphate pyrophosphokinase, nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase, nicotinamide riboside kinase and nicotinamide nucleotide adenylyl transferase (Fig. 3). These enzymes belong to the salvage pathway to process the nicotinamide moiety or recover NAD from its byproducts, when nicotinamide is released from reactions resulting in the transfer of ADP-ribose to target moieties (Fig. 1).12 The more extended operons might also code for two distinct families of Macro domains and ADP-ribose glycohydrolases (ARGs) that cleave the covalent bond between ADP-ribose and the target moieties to release ADP-ribose (Fig. 1 and 3). One of these distinct families of Macro domains (formerly DUF2263 in the PFAM database) has recently been shown to function as a polyADP ribose glycohydrolase (PARG) (Fig. 1).43 The second family is the classical Macro domain, which includes members that bind ADP ribose derivatives and hydrolyze ADP-ribose 1′-phosphate (Appr1p) or OAADPR (Fig. 1 and 3).43,60 In some cases YbiA might also be fused to a classical Macro domain and an ARG domain (e.g. Ruminococcus gi: 291543774; Fig. 3). Some operons encoding a PARG-type Macro domain protein (e.g. Verrucomicrobium) are more elaborate and include further RNA-repair enzymes such as the polynucleotide kinase and Thg1, the 5′–3′ RNA polymerase (Fig. 3). Most remarkable are certain large gene clusters in bacteria such as Kordia algicida and Chryseobacterium gleum, which combine a YbiA-like gene with those coding for enzymes involved in nicotinamide salvage, several NAD-utilizing enzymes (KptA, a sirtuin that is distinct from the usual CobB-like deacylase and multiple ARTs), ARGs and a classical Macro domain protein (Fig. 3).

The above associations corroborate the link between the YbiA family of NADAR domains and NAD metabolism. The associations with KptA, Macro superfamily, ADP-ribose pyrophosphatase, ARG, sirtuin, and nicotinamide salvage and degradation enzymes suggest that the action of the NADAR domain is associated with the utilization of NAD to generate ADP-ribose derivatives. More specifically, these associations point towards NADAR itself interacting with ADP-ribose derivatives. Further, the strong association with KptA suggests that one of the major roles of the YbiA family of NADAR domains is likely to occur in the context of RNA-processing. This possibility receives further support from the domain architectures of the eukaryotic members of this family (Fig. 3): one conserved fusion combines the NADAR domain with a RNA-binding RRM and phosphopeptide-binding FHA domains in several chromalveolate eukaryotes (e.g. Plasmodium), whereas other proteins combine the NADAR domain with RNA-binding domains, such as the LA and ribosomal protein L1-like domains and the low-complexity RGG repeats (Fig. 3). The C. elegans YbiA homolog irg-1 (gi: 351020506) was recently recovered as being highly induced by bacterial pathogens.61 Given the links of the eukaryotic NADAR domains to NAD consumption in the context of RNA-processing, it is conceivable that this RNA-related function is utilized in pathogen response in C. elegans. Interestingly, unlike most other eukaryotes, nematodes possess multiple paralogous NADAR proteins of the YbiA family, including versions with up to three tandem repeats in the same polypeptide (C. elegans C23G10.8; Fig. 3). The presence of a YbiA family NADAR domain in the polyproteins of RNA viruses is also of interest in this regard because it mirrors the earlier reported occurrence of Macro and 2H phosphoesterases (which hydrolyze 2′,3′-cyclic phosphates and Appr>p) in diverse RNA and retroviruses.60,62,63 Thus, it is conceivable that the NADAR domains also perform functions comparable to these enzymes in the above viruses. Finally, the presence of YbiA-like NADAR domains (including phage T4 gp33.3-like proteins) in NCLDVs and several bacteriophages may also be linked to their possession of functionally linked RNA-repair enzymes that include the 2H phosphoesterases and RNA ligases. Given that endoRNAses that do not use a metal-dependent catalytic mechanism tend to generate 2′,3′-cyclic phosphate,64,65 repair of such ends is likely to involve NAD-utilizing enzymes such as KptA. In archaea and eukaryotes such cyclic phosphates emerge naturally as a part of cellular process such as tRNA splicing, rRNA and snRNA processing;66–69 hence, it is conceivable that the NADAR domains, like the MACRO and 2H domains, participate in such processes. While bacteria do not possess comparable RNA splicing processes, their tRNAs and other RNAs are targets of a multitude of toxic endoRNAses coming from classical type-II toxin–antitoxin systems, plasmid encoded bacteriocins, and a recently discovered class of chromosomal polymorphic toxins.70–72 Similarly, DNA viruses are subject to defensive cellular responses that cleave tRNA and other virally encoded RNAs that could result in 2′-phosphate-containing products.65,73 Eukaryotic RNA viruses also face host endoRNAses and also in several cases possess their own endoRNAses that are related to the endoRNAse domains of bacterial toxins (e.g. the EndoU RNase), which can generate 2′-phosphate-containing cleavage products.70,74,75 In all these cases, RNA repair via a KptA-dependent mechanism is likely to generate ADP-ribose derivatives, which when further processed by the NADAR domain might result in improvement of the overall efficiency of repair. Alternatively, the DNA viral gp33.3 like proteins could function in conjunction with the ADP ribosyltransferases encoded by several of these viruses, such as the T4 enzyme which modifies the host RNA polymerase α-subunit.76

The BC4488 family and a previously uncharacterized ART family define a novel NAD-dependent modification system We observed that the bacterial versions of the second distinct family of NADAR domains, the BC4488 family, in contrast to the above-described YbiA family, showed strong operonic association with genes encoding an uncharacterized family (hereinafter BC4486 family, after the gene linked to BC4488) of conserved proteins (Fig. 3). Profile–profile comparisons revealed that the BC4486 family of proteins belonged to the ART superfamily (p = 10−7; 95% probability), which include KptA, ARTs and PARPs. Structure prediction using this multiple alignment presented an α + β fold with 6 core strands, which is congruent with the secondary structures of the known members of the ART superfamily (Fig. 4).16–21,31,47 Comparison of the multiple alignment of this family with those of other members of the ART superfamily revealed an HxT signature in the first strand, a conserved Y in the second strand and a QxE signature in the 5th strand. These positions correspond to the key catalytic motifs of the superfamily that tightly envelop the NAD in the active site.16–21,31,47 The presence of the acidic residue in the 5th strand (i.e. the E) and a large insert between the 4th and 5th strands and the absence of a N-terminal winged HTH domain distinguish the classical ARTs which modify proteins and bases from the KptA-like enzymes, which act on 2′-phosphates.67 The above features shared with classical ARTs strongly suggests that the BC4486 family is likely to modify proteins or bases and not RNA termini. Further, the active site in the majority of members of this family assumes the H–Y–E type pattern (based on the conserved residues from the above-mentioned signature; Fig. 4), which is a distinguishing feature of a clade within the ART superfamily that unites the diphthamide-specific ARTs (e.g. diphtheria, cholix and Pseudomonas aeruginosa exotoxin A toxins) and the eukaryotic PARPs. These enzymes are currently known to modify diphthamide, glutamate/aspartate and lysines.16–21,31,47 Thus, they are distinct from the ART clade, which is characterized by a R–S–E type active site that modify residues such as arginine (further defined by an ExE signature associated with 5th strand), cysteine and asparagine and nucleic acid bases.16–21,31,47 Given that diphthamide is unique to the eukaryotic elongation factor EF2, it is possible that the BC4486 family of ARTs modifies lysines or glutamates, just like the eukaryotic PARPs. Some of the predicted BC4488 operons, in addition to the novel ARTs also code for ARGs (Fig. 3). Thus, even the BC4488 family of NADAR domains can be linked to the NAD metabolism by virtue of their functional connection to this novel family of ARTs. However, they do not display most of the other associations observed in the YbiA family (e.g. Nudix or NAD salvage enzymes), suggesting that the two families of NADAR domains have evolved different biochemical capabilities.

To better understand the role of the BC4486 family of novel ARTs, we performed a reciprocal gene neighborhood analysis to determine their potential operonic associations. Consistent with the above results, we observed that the reciprocal analysis recovered the BC4488 family of NADAR domains as one of the most strongly associated neighbors of the BC4486-like ARTs (Fig. 3). Interestingly, most of those BC4486-like ART genes, which lacked a BC4488 family NADAR gene in their neighborhood, were associated with either a gene encoding a Macro domain or a classical ARG (Fig. 3). Thus, there is a mutually exclusive relationship between the BC4488 family NADAR genes and the Macro genes with respect to the BC4486-like ARTs. In some cases, these ARTs also displayed either C-terminal or N-terminal fusions to this Macro domain (Fig. 3). This gene organization suggests that the Macro and the BC4488 family NADAR are potentially functionally equivalent and represent structurally unrelated but catalytically equivalent enzymes. Further, in some cases instead of either the Macro or the BC4488 family genes there are genes encoding a 3rd structurally unrelated but catalytically comparable protein, i.e. ARG, in an equivalent position (Fig. 3). Hence, by virtue of this positional equivalence in the operons we suggest that the BC4488 family of NADAR and the Macro domains that co-occur with the BC4486-like ARTs might function as ARGs or PARGs. This is also supported by the fact that this gene organization is reminiscent of the gene organization of the DraG/DraT systems of nitrogen-fixing photosynthetic bacteria, which encode a pair of enzymes with opposing catalytic activities, namely an ADP-ribosyltransferase (DraT) and an ARG (DraG) which together form a regulatory switch for the dinitrogenase reductase (Fig. 3). Moreover, recently structural studies have confirmed that the PARGs are distinct clades of the Macro domain superfamily.43 Thus, we predict that the BC4486 ARTs and the linked ARGs, PARGs or NADAR proteins constitute regulatory enzyme pairs, which might respectively ADP-ribosylate and de-ADP-ribosylate target proteins. Given this association, we investigated if there might be any other pairs that are functionally analogous to the DraG/DraT-like systems and those with BC4486-like ARTs. Consequently, we uncovered a diverse group of ARTs, primarily with R–S–E type active site configuration from proteobacteria, firmicutes and actinobacteria that were coupled in a predicted operon with ARGs, with the ART gene always preceding the ARG gene. Interestingly, all these examples appeared to be secreted ARTs that are either delivered via the regular type II secretory pathway, or the type VI system (in proteobacteria with associated Phage tail/VgrG-like genes) and the ESX/type VII system (in actinobacteria with N-terminal ESAT-6/WXG-like domains).32,70 Importantly, these ART domains always occur as the C-terminal-most domain and in several cases might be preceded by long repetitive structures such as RHS/YD repeats (e.g. gi: 221200352 from Burkholderia multivorans) and proline/glycine rich low complexity stretches in actinobacteria (e.g. 134103275 from Saccharopolyspora erythraea). This operon organization and domain architecture indicates that these ARTs are toxins belonging to a recently described class of polymorphic toxins primarily implicated in intraspecific competition in bacteria, in which the C-terminal toxin domain is delivered into rival target cells.32,70,77 Thus, in this case the ARG is an immunity protein that protects the producing cell against its own ART toxin. Thus, the use of genomically linked opposing ART and ARG pairs appears to be widespread in bacteria across a thematically diverse group of systems.

To better understand the potential targets and functions of the novel BC4486-BC4488-like ART-ARG systems we further examined their genomic context for any additional conserved associations. One persistent theme that emerged was the association of versions of the system with both the BC4488 family of NADAR domains and the Macro domains with restriction-modification (R–M) operons in actinobacteria, cyanobacteria, bacteroidetes and gamma-, delta- and betaproteobacteria (Fig. 3, ESI†). Often this predicted ART–ARG gene pair was embedded right within a R–M operon that additionally encoded restriction endonucleases (REases), modification methylases (MTases) and DNA helicases. Interestingly, in Ilyobacter, a BC4488 NADAR domain is fused to the MTase of the RM system with which it is associated and is upstream to genes coding for nuclease and helicase genes (Fig. 3). In Faecalibacterium the BC4488 NADAR domain is also fused to a previously unrecognized REase (DUF1887; ESI†). These associations suggest that across diverse bacteria targets of these predicted ART–ARG systems are different components of R–M systems. This raises the remarkable possibility that the activity of these R–M systems might involve a further level of control that is under the alternative modification/de-modification of their component proteins.

Beyond these bacterial ART–ARG systems, the BC4488-like NADAR domains are present in diverse amoeboid eukaryotes (e.g. Dictyostelium and Naegleria) as well as NCLDVs that infect amoebae. Outside of the ART–ARG systems, more divergent BC4486-like ARTs are present in large eukaryotic DNA viruses, including baculoviruses, e.g. Agrotis segetum granulovirus, and NCLDVs such as Invertebrate iridescent virus 6 and Diadromus pulchellus ascovirus 4a. Divergent BC4486-like ART domains are also found in a potential toxin secreted by the intracellular chlamydia-like pathogen of animals and amoeboid eukaryotes, Waddlia chondrophila (gi: 337292305). Another group of ARTs related to the BC4486-like ARTs are also found in tailed bacteriophages such as Vibrio phage KVP40 and the Bacillus phage G. Interestingly, these ARTs have undergone a lineage expansion in the Bacillus phage G (10 paralogs) and the nanohaloarchaeo Haloredivivus (at least 8 paralogs; ESI†). We observed that eukaryotes also possess a distinct clade of BC4486-related ARTs, which in sequence searches appear to provide a link between the above-described BC4486-like proteins and the classical PARPs, which also belong to the H–Y–E clade. These eukaryotic versions are typified by the C-terminal-most domain of the human NEURL4 and Drosophila Bluestreak proteins (e.g. gi: 53829370; region 1408–1562; see ESI† for complete alignment). Homologous domains are found in most animal lineages (except nematodes), choanoflagellates, slime molds, entamoebae, and alveolates, and are typically fused to several other domains such as neuralized repeats, ubiquitin, WWE, and MORN-repeats. Notably, representatives of this clade of ART have undergone independent lineage specific expansions in slime molds, sponges, crustaceans, amphioxus and ciliates and these versions might be fused to either ubiquitin or MORN repeats. A functional link between these ARTs and the ubiquitin system is also suggested by a recent study indicating that NEURL4 functions with the ubiquitin E3 ligase HERC2 in maintaining normal centrosomal morphology.78 Additionally, the WWE domain found fused to an ART of this clade is also a common domain shared by ADP-ribosylation and ubiquitination systems.79 This led us to the proposal that ADP-ribosylation of component proteins, in conjunction with ubiquitination, might have a role in centrosomal assembly. The shared presence of several BC4486-like ARTs and BC4488-like NADAR domains in large DNA viruses, intracellular parasites and in some cases also the eukaryotic hosts of the former parasites, and their lineage-specific expansion in several eukaryotes, suggests that these proteins might have been further adapted for ADP-ribosylation-related functions in the context of host–pathogen interactions. On the other hand, some of the conserved eukaryotic versions like NEURL4 are likely to have been recruited as regulators of eukaryote-specific functions such as centrosome assembly.

Comparison with Macro, ARG and ART domains and a general proposal for the catalytic activity of NADAR domains The above analysis suggesting that the BC4488 family of NADAR domains function as ARGs or PARGs is consonant with the conclusion that the YbiA family of NADAR domains is likely to operate on ADP-ribose derivatives. Indeed, given the extreme divergence between the two families (Fig. 2) it is conceivable that the two have somewhat different biochemical activities. This situation can be compared to some of the other enzymes related to NAD and ADP ribose metabolism, wherein divergent members displaying a common structural fold with a conserved active site location might support distinct biochemical activities involving related molecules. For instance, the Macro domain fold includes several distinct activities, which operate on different ADP ribose derivatives such as O-acyl ADP ribose, polyADP ribose and 1′′-ADP ribose phosphate.43,44,60 Likewise, members of the ARG fold have both ADP-ribose glycohydrolase and O-acyl ADP-ribose deacylating activity (e.g. human ARH3).25,80,81 Similarly, the ART domains in addition to ADP-ribosylating amino acids, antibiotics, bases and 2′-phosphate RNA termini also function as NAD hydrolases that generate nicotinamide and ADP ribose (e.g. rat ART2).21,67,82 This situation is also seen in the NAD biosynthesis/salvage system wherein the homologous phosphoribosyltransferases of the TIM barrel NAPRTase family, nadC, nadV and pncB, respectively, act on distinct but related substrates such as quinolinate, nicotinamide and nicotinate.13 Thus, we suggest that the YbiA and the BC4488 families of NADAR domains are likely to catalyze distinct reactions on ADP ribose derivatives. Given the operonic association with KptA, we suggest that some of the YbiA-like proteins might process the 1′′–2′′ADP ribose cyclophosphate, which is then cleaved further into AMP and ribose 1-phosphate by the associated Nudix enzymes. It is also conceivable that some YbiA-like proteins might act on O-acyl ADP ribose—thus the YbiA family is seen to include enzymes that specifically help in the processing of diffusible ADP-ribose derivatives emerging from NAD-utilization, while the BC4488 family primarily acts on protein-linked ADP ribose moieties. This might explain the observation that, unlike the BC4488 genes, which have a mutually exclusive phyletic distribution with respect to the ARG-type Macro domains, the YbiA family sometimes co-occurs with PARG genes: the YbiA type NADAR domain in this case might help in cleaving the smaller multi-ADP-ribose units released by PARG action.

The above observations might also help explain a domain architecture involving a NADAR domain of the YbiA family from gammaproteobacteria, wherein it is combined with a GTP cyclohydrolase II domain (Fig. 3). These versions show none of the above-described gene neighborhood associations. The classical GTP cyclohydrolase II catalyzes the first step in riboflavin biosynthesis;83 however, the version of the domain fused to the NADAR domain represents a distinct paralog and these do not show any contextual association with riboflavin biosynthesis. Recently, a distinct function has been proposed for a version of the GTP cyclohydrolase II in uracil degradation, by potentially catalyzing the opening of the uracil ring.84 Based on this precedent, we suggest that the GTP cyclohydrolase II version fused to NADAR could play a comparable role in a nicotinamide degradation system involved in the degradation of NAD derivative or its byproducts like ADP-ribose derivatives.

Other novel domains with potential roles in interacting with NAD and ADP ribose derivatives The above analysis of the NADAR gene neighborhoods and associated domain architectures uncovered two additional, previously uncharacterized, conserved globular domains that showed multiple connections to these NAD-utilizing systems. The first of these families is prototyped by a small α + β domain around 115 aa found in representatives of most major bacterial lineages (e.g. Oter_1044 from Opitutus terrae; ESI†). We observed that this domain was fused to the PARG-type Macro domain found in the NADAR operon from Verrucomicrobium (gi:171913882; Fig. 3). The same domain also occurs in the above-described large NAD-utilization cluster from Kordia algicida OT-1 (gi:163754443; Fig. 3). Furthermore, it is also found fused to the C-terminus of an ARG domain in Nostoc punctiforme (gi: 186681810). Given its fusion to two distinct ADP-ribosylglycohydrolase domains, we named this domain the ARG-associated (ARGA) domain. Gene neighborhood analysis indicated that, like the YbiA family of NADAR domains, genes encoding proteins with the ARGA domain are found associated in predicted conserved operons with genes coding for Nudix ADP-ribose pyrophosphatase, classical Macro domains, ARGs, KptA and diverse NAD synthesis enzymes (Fig. 3; ESI†). These associations support a role for the ARGA domain in connection to NAD and ADP-ribose derivatives. Given its small size and the absence of universally conserved charged or polar residues suggestive of catalytic activity, it is likely that the ARGA domain is a novel NAD or ADP-ribose binding domain. By sensing these metabolites it could potentially regulate fused or physically associated catalytic domains that utilize NAD or ADP-ribose derivatives.

The second family is defined by an α/β domain of about 190 aa that always occurs as a standalone protein. A multiple alignment of this domain shows that it has several nearly universally conserved charged and polar residues, indicating that it is likely to be an enzyme (ESI†). Its predicted secondary structure reveals a regular pattern of five alternating strands and helices with a highly conserved glutamine between strand 1 and helix 1 and a DxE motif at the C-terminus of strand-4 that are likely to constitute the active site of this enzyme. Furthermore, this arrangement is reminiscent of the positioning of active site residues in the Rossmannoid folds suggesting that it might adopt such a α/β configuration.7,85 Its presence in the large NAD-utilizing cluster from Kordia (Fig. 3) suggests that it might utilize NAD, just like the other NAD-utilizing enzymes in the cluster (e.g. the Sirtuin and ART). This is further supported by its operonic association with Nudix ADP-ribose pyrophosphatase, independently of the NADAR operons (ESI†). We accordingly term this domain the NAD utilizing enzymatic (NUE) domain. Given its widespread presence in bacteria and also several eukaryotic lineages including certain animals, amoebozoans and heteroloboseans (ESI†), it would be of interest to investigate if it might function as a novel ADP-ribosyltransferase.

Genomic analysis reveals a biosynthetic pathway for a novel nicotinamide containing metabolite

Several archaea, proteobacteria, planctomycetes, actinobacteria, chloroflexi and cyanobacteria contain a second paralog of the NAD synthetase (Fig. 5, ESI†). Gene context analysis reveals that the paralog involved in NAD synthesis is typically distinguished by its routine occurrence in operons encoding other NAD salvage/biosynthesis enzymes such as the nicotinate phosphoribosyltransferase, adenylyl transferase, Nudix ADP-ribose pyrophosphatase, glutamine synthetase and its regulatory protein PII.12,13,50,52,53 However, the second paralog in these organisms displays a very distinct gene neighborhood context that never contains conventional NAD salvage/biosynthesis genes (Fig. 5). Instead, these conserved neighborhoods are typified by three other genes that almost always co-occur with the paralogous NAD synthetase gene. These genes encode an asparagine synthetase, an acyl carrier protein (ACP) and an acyl adenylating protein similar to those that activate acyl groups in fatty acid and non-ribosomal peptide synthesis (Fig. 5, ESI†).86 In several organisms this asparagine synthetase is a distinct second paralog, suggesting that the pathway defined by these predicted operons utilizes a dedicated asparagine synthetase. These observations combined with the absence of other NAD salvage/biosynthesis genes in these predicted operons suggest that this NAD synthetase is deployed along with other enzymes in the synthesis of a distinct metabolite that combines asparagine and NAD moieties.

Although, at this point, we have to rely solely on the genome neighborhood information described above to infer the metabolic pathway associated with NadE2, it is tempting to speculate on its nature. We propose the following tentative biochemical scheme for the action of enzymes encoded by this system (Fig. 5): given the close relationship of the asparagine synthetase to conventional asparagine synthetases and the fact that in some organisms it might be the only asparagine synthetase encoded by the genome, we propose that it indeed synthesizes asparagine from aspartate and glutamine. The carboxyl group of this asparagine is then probably activated by the acyl adenylating protein and conjugated to the ACP, which serves as the scaffold for the synthesis of the ensuing product. Given that the NAD synthetase is closely related to the classical NAD synthetase in its adenylating PP-loop ATPase domain, we suggest that it is indeed likely to adenylate the carboxyl group in the nicotinate moiety just like the conventional NAD synthetases. However, the majority of these NAD synthetases lack an ammonia-generating nitrilase-like domain.12 Hence, we propose that these paralogous NAD synthetases upon adenylating nicotinate perhaps instead ligate its adenylated carboxyl group to the free NH2 group of the ACP-linked asparagine (Fig. 5). Thus, this system might generate an asparaginylated NAD or NMN, which might then be subject to further modifications. Evidence for this comes from the observation that several of these neighborhoods encode additional enzymes such as glycosyltransferases, O-acyltransferases of the hexapeptide repeat superfamily and in certain cases additional non-ribosomal peptide ligases with condensation domains (Fig. 5). This suggests that the basic metabolite might be further glycosylated and acylated or even combined with additional amino acid moieties. If the modified nicotinamide ring proposed to be generated by this pathway retains its properties then it is conceivable that the metabolite synthesized by these systems might function as a soluble antioxidant comparable to the peptide antioxidants, such as glutathione, mycothiol and bacillithiol.11,87,88 However, given the extensive modification, it is also possible that it is a secondary metabolite that has biochemical properties entirely distinct from NAD or NADP and has an unrelated role.

Evolutionary implications and general conclusions

Our investigation of the NAD metabolism system has helped in uncovering several previously uncharacterized enzymes and at least one potential NAD/ADP ribose-binding domain. Our findings also have considerable implications when placed in the broader context of the evolutionary history of NAD-dependent and NAD-utilizing enzymes. Comparative genomics suggests that the most ancient group of NAD-dependent enzymes is that possessing the classical Rossmann fold.89,90 One group of classical Rossmann fold enzymes, typified by glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, does not further process NAD as a substrate, but merely uses it as a cofactor for catalyzing redox reactions.14,90 The presence of these enzymes in the core gluconeogenetic/glycolytic pathway and their nearly universal presence across the three superkingdoms of life suggest that such NAD-dependent classical Rossmann fold enzymes were already present in the last universal common ancestor (LUCA).89,91 A second group of enzymes with the classical Rossmann fold includes the sirtuins, deoxyhypusine synthase and the NAD–NADP transhydrogenases, which display a similar topology as the former,92,93 but bind NAD in the reverse configuration relative to the former. The presence of the deoxyhypusine synthase in the common ancestor of the archaeo-eukaryotic lineage and the presence of a NAD–NADP transhydrogenase-like enzyme in the common ancestor of the bacterial lineage suggests that at least one NAD-dependent dehydrogenase with the second version of the Rossmann fold was present in the LUCA.89 Consequently, it may be argued that dehydrogenases displaying versions of the classical Rossmann fold with the two distinct NAD-binding modes had already diverged from each other prior to the LUCA.

Sirtuins are found across three superkingdoms of life, with several paralogous versions in eukaryotes. Phylogenetic analysis suggests that there was a notable diversification of sirtuins in bacteria and the eukaryotic versions were acquired on several occasions from bacteria, followed by further eukaryote-specific radiations (ESI†).94 In contrast, majority of archaeal sirtuins from euryarchaea, crenarchaea and korarchaea appear to form a slow-evolving monophyletic clade. Based on this and the widespread distribution of sirtuins in both bacteria and archaea, we infer that an ancestral sirtuin was likely to have been present in the LUCA. While belonging to the second group of classical Rossmann fold enzymes, which includes dehydrogenases, the sirtuins have evolved an additional set of catalytic residues that are not found in any of these dehydrogenases.34,35,92 The acquisition of these residues probably resulted in an ancestral NAD-binding Rossmann dehydrogenase giving rise to the sirtuins, which instead utilized NAD as a substrate to transfer ADP-ribose to target moieties. Together, these observations imply that sirtuins are likely to have been one of the first NAD-dependent ADP-ribosyltransferases. Similarly, independent transitions of NAD-cofactor dependent redox enzymes to NAD-utilizing adenylating enzymes appear to have also happened in the post-LUCA radiation of the Rossmann fold evolution as indicated by the Thi4-like enzymes, which utilize NAD as a substrate in the synthesis of thiamine.95,96 In the post-LUCA phase other structurally unrelated enzymes utilizing NAD as a substrate, rather than as a redox cofactor, emerged early in the evolution of either the bacterial or the archaeal lineage. In the bacterial lineage nucleic acid ligases with the ATP-grasp fold appear to have evolved the ability to utilize NAD for adenylating phosphate moieties at the ends of nucleic acid as an intermediate in the ligation of DNA.49,97 The archaeo-eukaryotic lineage displays several universally conserved RNA-processing enzymes, such as RNA 2′-phosphotransferase (KptA), RNA 3′-cyclase, 2H superfamily cyclic phosphodiesterases, and Thg1 polymerases.63,98,99 In contrast, these are only sporadically distributed in bacteria and may not co-occur as a group in the bacteria that possess them. Hence, it appears likely that these arose first in the archaeo-eukaryotic lineage as components of their unique tRNA processing systems, which were subsequently transferred to bacteria and utilized in RNA repair. Unlike KptA, in the archaeo-eukaryotic lineage, bacteria do not show any widely conserved version of the ART fold that can be traced to their common ancestor. Hence, it appears that the ART fold first emerged in the archaeo-eukaryotic lineage in the form of KptA as a structurally distinct NAD-utilizing ADP ribosyltransferase. The observations reported above suggest that following the transfer of KptA-like enzymes to bacteria, these NAD-utilizing systems underwent extensive diversification in the bacterial lineage. This process involved the innovation and recruitment of additional enzymes, such as the NADAR, ARG and Macro domains, which further processed NAD-derived products generated by the action of KptA in the context of RNA repair.

Importantly, the prediction of a novel ART of the H–Y–E clade (i.e. the BC4486) that functions in conjunction with the NADAR, Macro or ARG domains, when combined with the above observations, has general implications for understanding the further evolution of NAD-utilizing systems. The system defined by this ART adds to the diversity of potential NAD-utilizing protein-modifying ARTs that are analogs of the DraT–DraG system.25–27,100 The newly identified BC4486-like ARTs retain the same form of the first and second catalytic motifs as KptA, while acquiring an acidic residue in the third position. This, together with the archaeo-eukaryotic origin of the ART fold, suggests that protein-modifying ARTs first emerged as a part of the bacteria-specific radiation of this fold, and the BC4486-like ARTs possibly represent an intermediate in this transition. The BC4486-like ART-containing systems, which we have uncovered in this study are sporadically distributed across a wide phylogenetic range of bacteria, and their cores are comprised of a dyad of proteins that respectively add and remove ADP-ribose modifications from target proteins. This genomic organization, which is comparable to type II toxin–antitoxin systems, suggests that protein-modifying ARTs perhaps emerged as components of mobile, potentially selfish, toxin–antitoxin-like systems that were on occasions recruited as regulatory switches.72 This situation may also be compared to the polymerase β-fold nucleotidyltransferases that exist both as protein-modifying regulatory systems (e.g. the protein uridylyl transferase GlnD) and the mobile small nucleotidyltransferases. The genes for the latter enzymes always co-occur with an associated ORF, in type-II toxin–antitoxin like gene dyads, with the products of their associated ORFs potentially removing nucleotidyl modification that they catalyze.101 In course of this diversification, the ARTs also appear to have acquired a wider substrate range in terms of target residues with modifications to the active site (e.g. emergence of the R–S–E clade of ARTs).16–21,31,47 This diversification of ARTs of the R–S–E clade appears to have followed two distinct courses: (1) in elements resembling type-II toxin–antitoxin-like systems, such as the previously described DraT–DraG-like systems. (2) In the newly discovered class of elements deployed in intra-species conflicts (such as those described above), wherein the ART toxin is translocated to the cell surface and delivered via contact or through injection by the type VI secretory system into target cells. Some versions of the latter type appear to have been further adapted in inter-species conflict, in particular in pathogenic bacteria as toxins directed against their eukaryotic hosts. This bacterial diversification of the protein-modifying ARTs both in the context of intra-genomic conflicts (i.e. type II toxin–antitoxin-like systems) and inter-organism conflict (i.e. toxin ARTs delivered to target cells) appears to have also provided a niche for the emergence and diversification of antitoxins or immunity proteins that would reverse the modifications catalyzed by the toxin ARTs. It was in this context that several enzymes such as the BC4488-like NADAR domains and different ADP ribosylglycohydrolases (including the MACRO domain versions, PARGs and the classical ARGs) appear to have emerged and radiated. The extraordinary expansion of such toxin systems in bacteria, along with the selective pressures due to emerging resistance and immunity proteins provided extensive opportunities for the diversification of ART toxins in such systems. As a consequence, ARTs with highly specialized targets against which resistance is difficult to develop, such as diphthamide and bases in DNA, emerged in such systems. Additionally, ART domains were also recruited as neutralizing enzymes for antibiotics deployed in inter-specific conflicts among bacteria.16–21,31,47

Eukaryotes appear to have acquired and recruited these components from the above-described bacterial radiation of the NAD-dependent systems on several independent occasions. The shared H–Y–E active site configuration in the BC4486-like ARTs, diphthamide-specific ARTs and PARPs suggests that the latter could have potentially emerged from a BC4486-like ART from a toxin–antitoxin-like system or a related version. Indeed, we have detected several bacterial homologs of PARPs as toxin domains among the versions of the recently described polymorphic toxin systems32,70 (e.g. gi: 291451874 from Streptomyces albus), suggesting that they probably arose as part of the radiation of toxin systems in bacteria. Such a PARP precursor and also certain sirtuins appear to have been already acquired prior to the last eukaryotic common ancestor, perhaps from endosymbiotic bacteria, giving rise to the histone-deacetylation and polyADP-ribosylation systems seen in eukaryotes.94,102 Further Sirtuin, Macro, NADAR, NUE, and ART domains appear to have also been repeatedly acquired by eukaryotes in their subsequent evolution and incorporated into diverse functional systems distinct from those of the ancestral bacterial versions. The NEURL4 clade of BC4486-related ARTs represents a potential independent transfer that probably happened well after the last-eukaryotic common ancestor but prior to divergence of several major eukaryotic lineages, such as opisthokonts and alveolates. In the case of ARTs, new acquisitions from toxin genes of symbiotic or parasitic bacteria appear likely. Indeed, some of the eukaryotic versions are deployed in a functional capacity similar to the original toxins (e.g. induction of apoptosis by pierisin-like ARTs in insects23). Given the genomic linkage between ARTs and ARGs in several of the bacterial gene neighborhoods described in this work, transfer of an entire gene cluster from bacteria in a single event could have potentially supplied both the enzyme that generates and removes the modification transfer, thereby enabling their recruitment as a regulatory switch. Phylogenetic analyses of the YbiA and BC4488 clades of the NADAR superfamily, as well as the NUE domain, despite uncertainties arising from rapid sequence divergence, also tend to support a picture with multiple independent transfers of these domains to eukaryotes (ESI†).

On a more general note, our observations suggest that the NAD-dependent biopolymer-modifying enzymes display an evolutionary pattern comparable to that seen in the ubiquitin and the ATP-grasp and glutamine synthetase-like COOH–NH2 ligase-dependent protein modifying systems: in all these cases the initial enzymatic components arose as part of core biosynthetic pathways. Subsequent radiations, particularly in bacteria, spawned paralogous versions with more diversified targets and regulatory capabilities, often as components of systems deployed in secondary metabolism and inter-genomic conflict in bacteria.1,2,7 These were then acquired by eukaryotes and incorporated into their functional systems in ways entirely different from their original bacterial roles. We hope that the novel findings and hypotheses presented here (Table 1) will inspire further biochemical investigations that might lead to a better understanding of diverse NAD-dependent systems.

Materials and methods

Sequence profile searches were performed against the NCBI non-redundant (NR) database of protein sequences (National Center for Biotechnology Information, NIH, Bethesda, MD), and a locally compiled database of proteins from eukaryotes with completely or near-completely sequenced genomes. PSI-BLAST103 searches were performed using an expectation value (e-value) of 0.01 as the threshold for inclusion in the position-specific scoring matrix generated by the program; searches were iterated until convergence. Structure similarity searches and alignments were obtained using the DALI program.104 Protein structures were visualized and manipulated using the PyMol (http://pymol.sourceforge.net/) program. Multiple alignments were constructed using the Kalign program,105 followed by manual correction based on PSI-BLAST high-scoring pairs, secondary structure predictions, and information derived from existing structures. Protein secondary structure was predicted using a multiple alignment as the input for the JPRED2 program,106 which uses information extracted from a PSSM, HMM, and the seed alignment itself. Pairwise comparisons of HMMs, using a single sequence or multiple alignment as query, against profiles of proteins in the PDB database were performed with the HHPRED program.107,108 Similarity-based clustering was performed using the BLASTCLUST program [ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/blast/documents/blastclust.html] with empirically determined length and score threshold parameters. Maximum likelihood phylogenetic trees were inferred using the program FastTree109 with default parameters. Gene neighborhoods in prokaryotes were obtained by isolating conserved genes immediately upstream and downstream of the gene in question showing separation of less than 70 nucleotides between gene termini. Neighborhoods were determined by searching NCBI PTT tables (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=Genome) with a custom PERL script. All large-scale procedures were carried out using the TASS software package.

