Distribution and evolution of short tandem repeats in closely related bacterial genomes
Abstract
Simultaneous identification and comparison of perfect and imperfect microsatellites within a genome is a valuable tool both to overcome the lack of a consensus definition of SSRs and to assess repeat history. Detailed analysis of the overall distribution of perfect and imperfect microsatellites in closely related bacterial taxa is expected to give new insight into the evolution of prokaryotic genomes. We have performed a genome-wide analysis of microsatellite distribution in four Escherichia coli and seven Chlamydial strains. Chlamydial strains generally have a higher density of SSRs and show greater intra-group differences of SSR distribution patterns than E. coli genomes. In most investigated genomes the distribution of the total lengths of matching perfect and imperfect trinucleotide repeats are highly similar, with the notable exception of C. muridarum. Closely related strains show more similar repeat distribution patterns than strains separated by a longer divergence time. The discrepancy between the preferred classes of perfect and imperfect repeats in C. muridarum implies accelerated evolution of SSRs in this particular strain. Our results suggest that microsatellites, although considerably less abundant than in eukaryotic genomes, may nevertheless play an important role in the evolution of prokaryotic genomes and several gene families.

Abbreviations
SSRsimple sequence repeatbpbase pair(s) Mbp megabase(s) or 1 million bp.
Keywords
Genome evolution Microsatellite SSR Chlamydia Escherichia Prokaryotes

1. Introduction
Microsatellites – simple sequence repeats (SSRs) – are of great practical and theoretical importance in eukaryotes (Ellegren, 2004, Kashi and King, 2006). In prokaryotes, their abundance is relatively low (van Belkum et al., 1998, Eckert and Yan, 2000, Metzgar et al., 2001, Schlotterer et al., 2006, Mrazek et al., 2007), they nevertheless contribute to genome polymorphism in bacteria (Lindstedt, 2005). Escherichia coli O157:H7 VNTR repeats have been recently monitored (Noller et al., 2003). Since there is no consensus definition of microsatellites (Ellegren, 2004), it is not straightforward to compare SSRs identified in different studies. We have recently introduced a new approach, the separate identification and subsequent comparison of perfect and imperfect SSRs (Gáspári et al., 2007) to overcome this difficulty. Our approach is also expected to yield information about the history of the repeats if we assume that the majority of imperfect repeats containing a perfect core is a remnant of a longer perfect stretch. In this paper we apply our approach to related bacterial taxa to assess the intra- and inter-group similarities of genomic repeat distributions. Parallel investigation of related genomes using multiple SSR detection methods, combined with standardized SSR classification (Jurka and Pethiyagoda, 1995, Tóth et al., 2000) is expected to yield a biologically relevant picture of the significance of SSRs in the bacterial strains under study.

The two bacterial groups selected for the present survey include E. coli and Chlamydial strains. Chlamydiales comprise a monophyletic group that is phylogenetically well separated from other bacterial taxa (Stephens et al., 1998, Kalman et al., 1999, Read et al., 2000, Read et al., 2003, Shirai et al., 2000, Chen et al., 2007). Their genome evolution has recently been investigated by bioinformatic methods (Ortutay et al., 2003, McNally and Fares, 2007). These features make these genomes ideal for a comparative analysis.

We chose E. coli genomes as our other target group because these bacteria are among the most widely studied prokaryotes, with well-described genetics. The increasing number of E. coli strains with known genomes offers a unique opportunity to analyze SSR evolution in these very closely related bacteria (Blattner et al., 1997, Hayashi et al., 2001, Perna et al., 2001, Welch et al., 2002). We analyzed 4 Escherichia genomes used also in other studies (Azad and Lawrence, 2007, McNally and Fares, 2007).

2. Materials and methods
2.1. Genomes used for this study
Complete genome sequences for various strains of E. coli, Chlamydia muridarum, C. trachomatis, Chlamydophila pneumoniae and C. caviae were downloaded from NCBI GenBank (ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/Bacteria/). The genome sequences used for this study are summarized in Table 1.

2.2. SSR extraction and classification
SSR extraction and classification was performed as described previously (Gáspári et al., 2007), using in-house programs and Tandem Repeats Finder (TRF; Benson, 1999). Repeats with 1–6 bp units and with a minimum length of 12 bp were considered. Repeat unit classes were standardized as described earlier (Jurka and Pethiyagoda, 1995, Tóth et al., 2000, Gáspári et al., 2007), e.g. the class ‘acg’ represents all of its permutant and/or reverse complement sequences (acg = cga =gac = cgt = gtc = tcg). To identify imperfect repeats corresponding to perfect ones (i.e. to select perfect and imperfect repeats at identical loci within a selected genome), all imperfect repeats found around the location of each perfect repeat were selected. If there were multiple imperfect repeats matching the perfect one, priority was given to repeats with a repeat class identical to that of the perfect repeat. If no such imperfect repeat was found, the lengths of the repeated units were considered in a way that one of them must be a multiple of the other (e.g., a perfect repeat with unit length 6 can match an imperfect one with unit length 3). It is important to stress that in this context, ‘matching’ perfect and imperfect repeats are located in the same genome, and no systematic attempt was made to find homologous repeats in related genomes.

2.3. Data processing and evaluation
All data were stored in MySQL tables for subsequent analysis. Matching perfect and imperfect repeats were identified as being located at the same chromosomal position within a genome. Therefore, these repeats were identified by two independent methods. SSRs were assigned to coding or non-coding regions according to the ‘CDS’ records in the NCBI annotation. Orthologous genes in related strains were identified using the KEGG Database (http://www.genome.jp/kegg, Kanehisa et al., 2006). Gene sequences were aligned using ClustalW (Thompson et al., 1994). All other computations were performed using in-house PERL programs. Amino acid repeats encoded by trinucleotide SSRs were identified by mapping the repeat position onto the coding nucleotide and the corresponding translated protein sequences in the annotation of the GenBank files. Identical amino acids coded by at least 50% of the bases in the repeat sequence were included in the statistics. This was important to characterize imperfect repeats and also to account for the fact that repeat units may not coincide with codons (even a perfect repeat may code for more than one amino acid types).

2.4. Comparison of repeat distributions
To assess the differences between perfect and imperfect repeat distribution patterns and to compare the differences of such repeat distributions among bacterial strains, we applied the chi-square contingency analysis which tests the equality of two observed distributions as described in Gáspári et al. (2007). Here, the term ‘distribution pattern’ refers to the relative abundance of repeats in different classes in whole genomes (data as presented in Table 2, Table 3 and in supplementary Table S1). We emphasize that the probability value obtained in the analysis is not evaluated here as in a conventional statistical test, but rather as an indicator that can measure the similarity of the distributions (Gáspári et al., 2007). Moreover, when it is used for the comparison of matching perfect and imperfect repeats within a genome, it is not expected to give statistically significant differences since the data compared come from different interpretations of the very same sequence. Therefore, any discrepancy detected suggests a difference of biological relevance. Our approach is highly similar to the PRIDE method applied for protein structure comparison (Carugo and Pongor, 2002) where contingency analysis is also applied as a measure for similarity and not as a conventional statistical test. Details of the contingency analysis calculations (excluded classes, χ2 values etc.) can be found in supplementary Table S2.

3. Results
3.1. Overall microsatellite distribution in the selected strains
We found a considerable excess of tri- and hexanucleotide repeats with much less mono-, di-, tetra- and pentanucleotide SSRs. This is consistent with coding sequences comprising a large fraction of the genomes investigated, as only repeats with unit lengths of multiples of three do not cause frameshift upon expansion in coding regions. Indeed, the vast majority of repeats are in coding regions (supplementary Table S1). Most of the perfect repeats identified are matched by an imperfect one. Exceptions can arise when the imperfect repeat is identified with a different repeat unit. Typical examples are repeats of anx units (e.g. aaag and aaaaat) that can be identified as imperfect polyA stretches by TRF.

The length of the vast majority of the perfect repeats found is 12 nt (e.g. four 3-mer units), which was the minimum detectable SSR length allowed in our analysis. The longest average perfect repeat lengths are observed for the E. coli strains O157:H7 and O157:H7 EDL933, where the agagcc repeats are over 34 and 46 nt long on average, respectively.

Although we detected SSRs up to hexamer units, in accordance with the genomes under study being packed with protein-coding sequences, we focus primarily on trinucleotide repeats in this paper. Cumulated length per megabase data for the matching perfect and imperfect trinucleotide repeats (here the term ‘matching’ means those with strictly the same repeat class) were calculated for the four E. coli and seven Chlamydial genomes (Table 2, Table 3 and supplementary Fig. S1).

3.2. Overview of trinucleotide repeats in the investigated genomes
Although the number of identified repeats is generally low (there are repeat classes represented by less than five or even only a single 12 nt copy in all genomes), several trends can clearly be identified. Chlamydial genomes tend to exhibit higher density of trinucleotide repeats than the E. coli strains (Table 2, Table 3). The difference can be more than twofold (C. caviae, ~ 345 bp/Mbp vs. E. coli O157:H7 EDL33, ~ 142 bp/Mbp for perfect repeats). (Considering all identified repeats, there are no striking differences between the overall repeat abundances but the E. coli genomes contain about 1.5 times more types of repeats (classes) than the Chlamydial ones (supplementary Table S1)). E. coli strains have a clear preference for acc, agc, atc and ccg repeats. As expected from their close evolutionary relationship, the two O157:H7 strains exhibit highly similar repeat distributions. The highest imperfect/perfect ratio (≈ 1.75) is also found in these two genomes for aac repeats. This means that the imperfect microsatellites are on average 1.75 times longer than their matching perfect counterparts. All of the Chlamydial genomes are rich in aag repeats, although their SSR distribution is less homogeneous than that of E. coli. In C. muridarumagc is the most abundant repeat (Table 3 and supplementary Fig. S1) and it is almost as abundant as aag in C. caviae, while ccg repeats were not detectable in Chlamydiales except for C. caviae. The three C. pneumoniae strains show highly similar repeat distributions. The largest imperfect/perfect ratio is found in the C. pneumoniae strains for aac repeats (> 2.7) and in C. muridarum for the class agc (1.9).

The observed abundance of perfect trinucleotide repeats for all (i.e. coding plus non-coding) sequences is roughly two (for Chlamydiales) and three times (for E. coli strains) less than that found in all sequences in eukaryotes using similar recognition criteria (Tóth et al., 2000). Although this difference increases considerably (with a factor of two or three, depending on the taxon) when comparing bacterial data to eukaryotic coding sequences, this indicates that overall trinucleotide repeat density is not dramatically different in prokaryotic and eukaryotic genomes as a whole. Different abundance of repeats with identical GC-content (e.g. aac and aag, agc and acg) suggests that the overall repeat distribution is affected by selective forces and is not a result of non-specific stochastic processes.

There are several interesting differences in the amino acid sequences coded by trinucleotide repeats when comparing Chlamydiales and E. coli strains (supplementary Table S3). Perfect aag repeats mostly code for glutamic acid residues in Chlamydia but for phenylalanine in E. coli. Although the former is the most abundant residue in all strains when considering imperfect repeats, the preference for phenylalanine in the E. coli genomes is still apparent. In the case of both perfect and imperfect agc repeats, the difference in the coded sequences can clearly be observed, as alanine is the most abundant in Chlamydiales and leucine in E. coli strains.

3.3. Comparison of perfect and imperfect trinucleotide repeats
Genomic distributions of all perfect and imperfect trinucleotide repeats found are available in supplementary Fig. S2A and B. As expected, imperfect repeats are detected at many more locations in the genomes than perfect ones. It is apparent that the much smaller genome size results in the absence of certain repeat classes (aat, act, ccg) from most strains of Chlamydiales, even though the normalized total abundance of SSRs is higher in Chlamydiales than in E. coli. To obtain a robust measure of the similarity of perfect and imperfect repeat distribution patterns, contingency analysis was performed on the abundance (number and total length of repeats per megabase) data of the matching perfect and imperfect trinucleotide repeats (Table 2, Table 3). P values around 1 correspond to high similarity of the two compared distributions while lower values indicate discrepancies, meaning that the relative abundance of imperfect repeat classes does not follow that of matching perfect ones (Table 4). While the perfect/imperfect distributions are highly similar in most genomes, they are largely different in C. muridarum. Closer inspection of the repeat data shows that this is due to the discrepancy in the total lengths of agc repeats. The total length of imperfect agc stretches is nearly twice as long as that of perfect ones, while other classes show no or only subtle differences in terms of perfect and imperfect repeat lengths (supplementary Fig. S1). We note that this strain also contains imperfect aag repeats in high abundance but the majority of them are not matched by perfect repeats with the same class. It is therefore very unlikely that they stem from perfect aag stretches. This example illustrates the importance of our approach of analyzing SSRs identified independently as both perfect and imperfect ones.

3.4. Comparison of repeat distributions in different bacteria
Distributions of matching perfect and imperfect trinucleotide repeats were also compared across bacterial genomes (Table 5 and supplementary Table S2). In general, intra-group similarities of Chlamydial and E. coli genomes are higher than the inter-group similarities between members of the two taxonomic groups, which are practically zero. The only notable exception is C. muridarum, which shows higher similarity to three E. coli genomes. This is only observable for the length per megabase, but not for the number per megabase measure. Within Chlamydia, the various C. pneumoniae strains are considerably more similar to each other in terms of repeat abundance than to other species within the group. These observations indicate different SSR preferences for the two phylogenetic groups investigated. Low probability values are also observed comparing different Chlamydia species.

3.5. Genes with high repeat content
The genes with the highest SSR content were identified and investigated in the eleven analyzed genomes. Only repeats identified both as perfect and imperfect SSRs were considered, but – in contrast to the analysis of trinucleotide repeats – SSRs with different repeat units were included (e.g. a long imperfect trinucleotide repeat can match multiple perfect hexanucleotide stretches, and in this case the imperfect repeat was not discarded). A number of the identified genes code for polymorphic outer membrane proteins or hypothetical proteins. In supplementary Tables S4 and S5 we give details for the ten genes with the highest repeat content from all studied genomes.

When considering functional categories for the genes with high perfect repeat content (using the classification of the KEGG database, see Section 2.3), it is apparent that genes in connection with Metabolism are by far the most abundant ones. Within this group, most genes are in connection with carbohydrate metabolism. Only eleven genes are classified as participating in information processing (environmental or genetic) and two as being involved in human diseases.

The picture becomes different when considering the genes with high imperfect repeat content. Here, genes involved in environmental information processing comprise the most abundant functional group, leaving metabolism-connected ones the second place. These observations can be rephrased as the relative length of perfect stretches in imperfect repeats of genes responsible for environmental information processing is lower than in metabolism-related coding sequences. It should be noted, however, that most genes are not yet classified in KEGG, thus cannot be included in this analysis (Table 6).

3.6. Gene-specific comparisons
We have selected some functionally well-characterized genes containing SSRs in at least two of the investigated genomes to highlight the importance of simultaneous analysis of perfect and imperfect repeats in the interpretation of evolutionary processes.

3.6.1. Gene tolA, coding for a cell envelope protein
The longest imperfect repeats found are located in the tolA gene that encodes a cell envelope protein in the four E. coli strains. This protein is not present in Chlamydiales. TRF classifies this repeat as an imperfect one with agc trinucleotide unit, while there is no matching perfect repeat in the same class. However, short perfect hexanucleotide repeat stretches can be found in this region. The sequence of the repeated 6-bp unit always contains the subsequence agc (e.g., aagcag). In two strains the imperfect repeat is 171 bp long while in the two O157:H7 strains the repeated length is 291 bp. The tolA gene sequences from these four strains are highly similar with two isoforms, the shorter one being carried by the O157:H7 strains. Although the long agc repeat is located around the 27-residue insertion, the longer SSR variants are found in the shorter isoforms. Closer inspection of the sequences reveals that a highly similar repeat region is detected differently in the two cases (supplementary Figs. S3A and S4). Since tolA genes have been selected for biased amino acid frequency according to other studies (Rooney 2003) and no perfect repeats with matching repeat class were found in this gene, we suggest that the imperfect repeat at this locus was not derived from an ancestral perfect one but resulted from selection for codon frequency, although a scenario with repeat expansion cannot be completely ruled out.

3.6.2. Gene ftsK, coding for a cell division protein
The FtsK cell division protein is a DNA segregation ATPase. Its gene, ftsK, is among the most repeat-rich ones in terms both of perfect and imperfect SSRs in E. coli strains but not in Chlamydiales. Similarly to the tolA gene, ftsK is dominated by a long agc repeat matched only by perfect repeats of different hexanucleotide sequences (supplementary Fig. S3B and S4).

3.6.3. Gene coding for 50S (large subunit) ribosomal protein L7/L12
The rplL gene encoding the 50S (large subunit) ribosomal protein L7/L12 of E. coli contains a 45-bp long imperfect agc repeat with a 12-bp perfect stretch. As the nucleotide sequence is almost fully conserved, the repeats are identical in the four E. coli strains and correspond to the alanine-rich protein sequence AAAAVAVAAGPVEAA. In Chlamydiales, this gene also contains imperfect repeats of class agc or aacagc, generally not matched by perfect ones. Further data (including name, genome, NCBI-GI and ACCESSION, length of repeat) of genes with high repeat content is available in supplementary Table S5.

4. Discussion
Distribution of short tandem repeats in 11 bacterial genomes shows various patterns characteristic for one or more strains under study. Although most perfect SSRs are only 12 nt long, longer imperfect repeats flanking them often indicate past expansion and demolition events. Other characteristic phenomena are the presence of preferred SSR classes and variations in imperfect and perfect SSR content in the investigated strains. This may reflect different evolutionary pressures. Low similarity of repeat distributions, especially in Chlamydiales, shows that SSR preferences can differ even between closely related strains, comprising a new feature which changes during speciation. Our results are consistent with the notion that although SSRs are less frequent in prokaryotes than in eukaryotes, they can nevertheless influence gene evolution (Ellegren, 2004).

When comparing imperfect and perfect repeats, the simplest assumption is that they follow the same overall genomic distribution, i.e. abundance data obtained for only perfect repeats represent well those of imperfect ones. This is true for most of the genomes used in our study with the notable exception of C. muridarum where the imperfect/perfect ratio of agc repeats is exceptionally high compared to other repeat classes. This discrepancy may reflect recent evolutionary changes if we assume that the majority of imperfect repeats with a perfect ‘core’ arose as a perfect repeat, and the present imperfect part is the result of disrupting mutations still allowing the recognition of the original SSR. It is also interesting that in terms of trinucleotide repeat distribution C. muridarum bears some resemblance to the studied E. coli genomes (supplementary Table S2), even though this weak similarity is only detectable at the total lengths of the repeats. It seems that the identified agc repeats are capable of expansion, 9 of the 13 affected genes contain both perfect and imperfect agc repeats (supplementary Table S5). The affected genes are either connected to translation (infB and rplL), or code for metabolism-related proteins (or have a yet unknown function).

Microsatellites can contribute to genetic variation by coding for amino acid repeats and also by being located in sequences that control gene expression (Kashi and King, 2006). The high fraction of coding sequences (and the corresponding relative abundance of tri- and hexanucleotide repeats) suggests that the former mechanism can be prevalent in bacteria. We have shown that the coding preferences of trinucleotide repeats are different among strains, and these differences are observable for both perfect and imperfect repeats (supplementary Table S3). This indicates active roles for SSRs in bacterial polymorphisms, consistent with earlier suggestions (van Belkum et al., 1998). We note that prevalence of tri- and hexanucleotide repeats in coding regions was also recently reported for Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae (Mrazek, 2006), which suggests that our findings have more general relevance in prokaryotes.

Polymorphisms caused by repeated sequences were previously assessed for several Chlamydial genomes (Rocha et al., 2002). Our results obtained using a different approach confirmed those findings. Among the genes with high SSR density, those for which function could be assigned are either responsible for essential cellular processes or code for polymorphic membrane proteins. For example, the FtsK protein is the essential bacterial ATPase that is responsible for the correct segregation of daughter chromosomes during cell division (Iyer et al., 2004). The presence of multiple SSRs in this gene might allow rapid evolution of some segments of the protein in E. coli, but not in Chlamydial strains.

Our observation that among genes with high repeat content, those involved in environmental information processing have higher imperfect/perfect ratio than genes with other functions (Table 6), raises the possibility of accelerated evolution of these coding sequences. This suggestion is supported by the polymorphic outer membrane proteins in Chlamydial genomes. In Chlamydiales, genes with relatively large repeat content in more than one strain almost exclusively encode polymorphic outer membrane proteins (Pmps) (Suppl. Table S5) that are often associated with pathogenicity (Gomes et al., 2004, Carlson et al., 2005). It is interesting that E. coli TolA, also a membrane-associated protein, contains a very long, although imperfect repeat that is polymorphic in the investigated strains. In this case the presence of the repeat can most probably be attributed to codon selection pressure, although it cannot be ruled out that this repeat was capable of expansion/reduction during the evolutionary history of these genes. In accordance with other an alyses concerning tandem repeats (de Castro et al., 2006) we suggest that SSR polymorphisms contribute to the variability of membrane proteins in prokaryotes.

In order to investigate the effect of horizontal gene transfer (HGT) events on the distributions of the repeats, we examined all genes introduced from different donor species into one of the Chlamydial strains or into the common ancestor of multiple ones, where applicable (Ortutay et al. 2003), and determined their repeat content (SSR data are shown in Suppl. Table S6). When considering the cases where a common ancestor was the recipient, we could detect no difference regarding matching perfect and imperfect trinucleotide repeats (i.e. differences were only observed for repeats not matched by the other type). In other cases no trinucleotide repeats were found in genes arisen by HGT, thus, HGT cannot be responsible for the intergenomic differences reported in Table 5. That leads us to believe that the results and conclusions presented here are not biased by HGT events.

We have shown that E. coli and Chlamydial strains exhibit characteristic SSR distribution with a marked relative abundance of tri- and hexanucleotide repeats. Simultaneous analysis of perfect and imperfect SSRs revealed discrepancies in repeat class distribution in C. muridarum indicative of recent evolutionary events. We suggest that microsatellites contribute to the genomic variability of prokaryotes even in closely related genomes, as supported by the observed difference in SSR distribution patterns even between related genomes. Genes related to environmental information processing, and in particular, the Chlamydia-specific Pmp proteins are candidates of sequences where SSRs can contribute to genetic variation in the strains examined.