Statistical analysis of mammalian pre-mRNA splicing sites

ABSTRACT
222 donor and 222 acceptor (including 206 pairs)
non-homologous splicing sites were studied. Well known features
of these were confirmed and some novel observations were made.
It is (1 ) cCAGGGag sn in (-60)-(-58) region of acceptor
sites; (2) strong coq)lementarity between regions (-69)-(-55)
and (-36)-(-22) of some of the acceptor sites, and (3) small
but statistically significant corlation between
discrimination energies of corresponding donor and acceptor
sites.

INTRODUCTION
It is well known that many genes of higher eukaryotes
coding for proteins include non-coding segments called introns.
Introns are spliced out after transcription in two stages. (1)
Cleavage at the donor (5' ) site and lariat formation at the
branch site near the 3' end of intron, (2) cleavage at the
acceptor site, ligation of exons and release of the
intron-lariat. Several small nuclear ribonucleoproteins are
implicated in the process. Particularly, U1 sRNP recognizes
the donor site, U2 snRWN preumably recognizes the branch site
and U5 sRNP interacts with the acceptor site [1].

An intron almost always begins with GU and ende with AG
dinucleotides (rare exceptions are listed in [2]). Highly
conservative AG/GURAGU at the exon-intron bodary is
complementary to the ACUUACCU near the 5' terminus of Ut snRA.
The short consensu at the acceptor sites, CAG/G, is preceded
by a region of pyrimidine abundance (polypyrimidine tract). A
branch site, which is known for several introns [3], is less
conservative and its consensus may be tentatively written as
YURAY.

There were several attempts to construct algorithms for
predicting spliCing sites. Weight matrices were uised (4] as
well as more complex pattern recognition methods (learnin
technique (5], perceptron (6, 7] , syntactic pattern analysis
[8]). However, a systematic study of the splicing sites has not
been undertaken. In this paper we aspire to fill this gap. We
do not try to create a recognition algorithm but some of the
results may be used for crude recognition. It is our belief
that in the absence of detailed knowledge of the stereochemical
mechanismsao splicing more sUCcessful algorithms should
include not only local but also global parameters such as base
periodicities and patterns of oligonucleotide usage. This work
is currently under progress.

KIPHODS
All programs were written ad hoc in the C programming
lacnguage and run under UNIX on Wicat-150. ResUlts were plotted
using the interactive graphics system GIN [9].
MEATERIAL

All mamalian protein coding DNA sequencesfrsom 5th
release tof b data bank were considered. Errors in the
features tables were corrected and pairs showing more than 75%
similarity in the intron were excluded. Then two data sets were
formed. The first one consisted of donor site regions (20
nucleotides into the exon and 80 nucleotides into the intron).
The second one consisted of acceptor site regions (80
nucleotides into the intron and 20 nucleotides into the exon).
The choice of parameters is motivated by the results of site
disactivation experiments [10, 11]. Information of pairs of
donor and acceptor sites that were termini of one intron was
saved.

Finally both data sets consisted of 222 sequences. There
were 206 pairs of corre oing donor and acceptor sites. Some
of the sequences were known only partially. Information about
it is presented on Fig. I (everhere positions are numbered
1-100). The curves are not mDnotonically non-increasing away
from the splice sites (positions 20/21 in the donor set and
positions 80/81 in the acceptor set) because of unknown
nuoleotides marked 'N' or '-" in the database.

Information content
Iniormation content of position I was calculated
according to [121:
R1(t) = 2 + I f1(B,1) l102 f1(B,l),
B
where .f1 (B, I) is the (relative) frequency of the nucleotide
B in the position 1. This characterizes the non-uniformity

Of base distribution in any given position. Plots of RG()
for donor and acceptor sites are given on Fig. 2. Similar plots
were obtained for dinueleotide infoxmation content (not shown).
For donor sites R1(I)>0.1 for 9 positions, their
consensus is 1AG/GUAGAGU. Outside of this conservative region
R1 ()<0.085 in the exon and R1 (1)<0.065 in the inltron.
Oonsensus for acceptor 8iteB is Yr17nAG/GnY.

Distribution of 2-, 4- and 5-nu1lleotides (accepo sites)
For each position (1,1+1,1+2,1+3) and each 4-nuoleotide
-B,B B B'4 let F(T,IX) be the number of sequences in the
data set swh tha T occurd with m moeta
mismatches in either Of positions (Z,....), see, (1+wP-t...);
ion nmmber Of mismatches m and number of sirmiltaneouly
considered positions W are parameters.
Nowr let for each position (Z, . .) Ti (I ) be the most
comon 4-nucleotide (in the above sense), T2(Z) be the second
best and sO on. We mayr then plot
Nrrs (Z) = N(T1 (I),7) = ax (T,Z) and frequencies of other
dist' vshed 4-nucleotides. An e Ie for m-0 and o-8 is
show onx Fig. 3. q!he peak correp -,-n to consensus CAGG and
the slope associated writh the polypyrimidine tract are visible.
T!here is also a not so high, but nevertheless mean fillful
signal in the positions 1-20. The most common 4-nucleotideB are
UGGG in positions 4-1t1, CAGG in positions 12-17 and AGGG in

positions 18-22. An analysiB of nearly best quartets shows that
the latter two may be parts of a longer signal cCAGGGag. The
gap between frequencies of the best and the second best
4-nucleotides also seems to be meaningful, for such a gap does
not appear in random simulations (not shown).
The signal is less expressive when m=O, w=16 and absent
when m--1, Wt4 (not shown). Such a situation may be caused,
for example, by a conservative signal in a part of the data
set. An additional study iB required to clarify the issue.
The signal corresponding to the branch site is notable for

its abBence. This is so because this site is relatively
non-conservative and furthermore does not occupy any
well-defined place in our alignment. We studied this site using
a Bimilar scheme. Frequency plots for several variants of the
branch site consensus are shown in Fig. 4. Each sequence
defined near the branch site region contains a 5-nucleotide in
the positions 51-65 which differs from YURAY in at most I
position (it is the minimum condition).
We have noted the avoidance of the AG dinucleotide in the
66-75 region of the acceptor sites (Tab. 1). The statistical
significance of this iB W0.1%.

Secondary structure
Possible conservative secondary structures were studied by
sunning dot-matrices for individual sequences or pairs of
sequences. We considered complementarity of UI snRNA and donor
sites, of U2 snRNA and U5 snRNA and acceptor sites, of pairs of
corresponding donor and acceptor sites, and
self-complementarity of donor and of acceptor sites.
Complementarity of donor site consensus and 5' tenus of UI
snRNA was clearly visible. The only other signal appeared in
the study of self-complementarity of acceptor sites that pairs
the regions 11-25 and 45-59. The distribution of the mrximn
lengths of complementary oligocleotides in these regions
together with the results of random simulation is shown in
Tab. 2; some examples are given in Tab. 3. One may notice the
increase in the number of complementary oligonucleotides of
length 5 or more. To evaluate exact statistical significance
does not seem to be possible because the regions have been
chosen by a highly informal procedure (by eye). However, a
rough estimate of the statistical significance by the %2-test
for rare events shows that the probability of a random
occurence of two 15-nucleotide regions with the excess of
complementary 6- through 9-nucleotides that would be equal or
greater that the observed one is much less than 10'.

Energy parameters
In [13] a method to evaluate (up to multiplicative
constant) discrimination energy of binding of a recognizing
particle and a functional site was developed. Let as before
f,(B, 1) be the frequsncy of the base B in the position 1,
J2(B'B,aX) be the frequency of dinucleotide B'B in the
position (1,+1), and N(B,l) be the mmber of occurrences
of B in 1. Denote N (l) = maxB (B,l). Let us assme
that the site consists of the positions I = 1, ..., L. It hba
been shown in [13] that in this case the discrimination erg
of recognition of the site B, ...B is

The first term in the formula describes the contribution of the
individual positions, the second one takes into account the
correlation of the neighboring positions. L is chosen either
according to the biological considerations or as the number of
positions with sufficiently large information content. It
should be noted that the positions with nearly uniform base
distribution do not influence the discrimination energy
perceptibly and it does not matter that one can not define the
site in any rigorous way. In some procedures we use also the
first term of a (designated by 8').
The energy B of base-pairing with UI snRNA was
calculated for the donor sites using the parameters from [14].
Bulge loops and iner loops arising from more than I mismatch
were not allowed, destabilizing contribution of the terminatg
base pairs was not considered and terminating G-U pairs were
allowed. B was meaured in tenth of kcal/mole.

We considered donor sites of length L=20 (positions
9-28: 12 in the exon and 8 in the intron) and acceptor sites of
length L=22 (positions 60-81: 21 in intron and I in exon).
This choice allowed us to use positions with the information
content R1>0.1 and (for donor sites) to take into account the
longest observed bse-pairings with UI snRNA. Sites with the
extremal values and some other sites are presented in Tab. 4.
The distribution of E, f th ande armis given on Pig. 5.
The correlation coefficient of Edon arnd £cis emill (0.2) but
apparently not rndo (snoificance level 0.5%). Tae reason for
this is not clear'. Onemght speculate that intros with str!Ong
both donor and acceptor sites are first to be s liced out.

Crude recognition
nes rgy parameters mayursed be as recognising functions.
(tables of mono- dsnumler and otide freqpencite that are
necessary for that are available upon request). We name
pre-sites (predicted sites) the sequefnces that satisfy some
conditions. Per donor pre-sites the condition is
£dom 12.0& don le2.0O& E -6STh
All the sites in the data setsatisfy it. Por acceptor sites
the condition is
{3 13.0 8 a¢ 13.0.
Pive sites from the acceptor data set (presented in tab. 4) do
not satisfy it. It should be noted, however, that parameters o
these sites sharply difier from the rest of the set (on more
thn 3 standard deviations)o.
We use these conditions to predict splicing sites in six
sequences. We ranked pre-sites according to the energy
parameters. The results are presented on Fig. 6 and in Tab. 5.
The sequence RNACOO (rat skeletal muscle actin, 3200 bp.)
had in the 5th intron the worst value of 6I.. There were 35
donor and 34 acceptor pre-sites (Pig. 6a). The sequene RNYIC2
(rat muscle myosin light chain, 3361 bp.) had one of the worst
values of ES-72 (5th intron), and there were 55 donor and 36
acceptor pre-sites (Pig. 6b). The sequence of the human
P-globin HSBGL3 (2050 bp.) was studied not because it has any
bad sites, but because many splicing affecting mutations were
known in it. There are 25 donor and 16 acceptor sites in it and
true sites have high ranks (Pig. 6c). The energy parameters
change adequately when a mutation improves a cryptic or weakens
a true splicing site, but it can not predict the choice of one
of several competing sites.

The remaining three sequences weere not present in the
training sets. They were taken from the release 48.0 of the
GenBank. These sequences were the mammalian sequences for which
the predictions made by the Shapiro-Senapathy algorithm were
available [2]. The sequence HUMH (human class I HLA gene, 4123
bp) had a relative TBIA in the training set, the other two,
RATOTRPB (rat chymotripsin B, 5809 bp) and RABMHI191 (rabbit
NHC class I gene, 3881 bp) were completely new. The ranks of
the true sites of these sequences obtained by the method
described here together with the Shapiro-Senapathy ranks are
presented in Tab. 5. It should be noted that the acceptor sites
of the second introns of the NHC genes (HSHLIA, HUNMH,
RABMHI199) do not satisfy the acceptor pre-Bite conditions (cp.
Tab. 4). To obtain the of these sites we ran the program
with the sole condition that the invariant AG should be
present.

It should be noted that we deliberately made our
conditions very weak. Our aim was not to lose any site, and we
did not try to avoid false positives. To make overall error
smaller one might impose a stricter condition, thus opening the
possibility of miBsing some true sites.

DISOUSSION
The avoidance of the AG dinucleotide immediately before
the acceptor splice site has been noted previously by Ohshima
and Gotoh [4]. It may be interpreted as the evidence for some
sort Of scaning mechanism since there are as many AG as
expected in the exon after the acceptor splice site. It should
be noted that there are no AG between the branch point and the
acceptor site in a few sequences for which the branch point is
known.

The GGGA sa al in the 20 region of acceptor sites was
noted also in [15]. There was a model of alternate base-pairing
proposed there, which explained the peaks in the distribution
of thi and some other 4-nuoleotides. That model, however, can
not be universal since this quartet and its derivatives are not
present in all of the sequences in the acceptor data set.

The observed complementarity of regions 11-25 and 45-59
also is not a likely candidate to the role of the universal
signal. First, in many sequences it is not present in any
visible form, and it also does not seem to be specific to some
family. Secondly, it is not fixed relative to the branch point
(Tab. 2) which is either in the loop or to the right of the
proposed stem. On the other side, the length of the
complementary oligonucleotides in some cases makes one believe
that the observed complementarity is not a mere statistical
artifact. Some mutagenesis experiments are required to clarify
the situation.

Edon is a much better predictor of donor sites than B. The
simplest explanation is that the simple procedure used to
calculate B is not a good one. The alternative to it would be
the assumption that the protein component of UI snRNP also
takes part in the recognition. The existence of the consensus
position A that does not base pair with U1 snRNA makes this C
explanation plausible.

The use of Edon and E... allows one to recognize all true
sites, but it is not enough to explain all the results of the
mutations (the problem of the correct choice) and to choose
correctly true sites among all the pre-sites. The former task
seems hopeless. Even the experiments with the duplication of
the splicing sites gave ambiguous results, at least in vitro
[16]. We believe that to solve the latter problem one has to
use both the local information (studied here) and the global
characteristics. It may be done in two wayB. One way is to try
to choose true sites between all pre-sites using somehow the
fact that it separates co and non-coding regions. It was
done in (6] and to some extent in [2] where the information
about the open reading frames have been used. An alternative
way would be to predict coding regions using some sort of
global recognition algorithm (e.g. well-known TSTCODE [17])
and then to attenuate the positions of the exon-intron and
intron-exon boundaries using the local data. This method also
would allow the use of the information of open reading frames.
