Glimpsing Over the Event Horizon: Evolution of
Nuclear Pores and Envelope

ABSTRACT
The origin of eukaryotes from prokaryotic ancestors is one of the major evolutionary
transitions in the history of life. The nucleus, a membrane bound compartment for confining
the genome, is a central feature of eukaryotic cells and its origin also has to be a central
feature of any workable theory that ventures to explain eukaryotic origins. Recent bioinformatic analyses of components of the nuclear pore complex (NPC), the nuclear envelope
(NE), and the nuclear transport systems revealed exciting evolutionary connections (e.g.,
between NPC and coated vesicles) and provided a useful record of the phyletic distribution
and history of NPC and NE components. These analyses allow us to refine theories on
the origin and evolution of the nucleus, and consequently, of the eukaryotic cell.
A central feature that distinguishes eukaryotes from prokaryotes is the presence in
eukaryotes of a membrane-bound compartment to confine the genome, transcription,
RNA maturation, and ribosome assembly. The eukaryotic nucleus, together with other
intracellular membrane compartments, originated during one of life’s major evolutionary
transition1 and is unparalleled in the prokaryotic world. This remains true even if some
bacteria have internal membranes. Members of a distinct group of bacteria, the
Planctomycetes, for example store their chromosomes within an internal membranous
structure, resembling a true nucleus.2 These nuclear bodies even have pore-like openings
reminiscent of eukaryotic NPCs. However, the genome sequence of Pirellula sp revealed
no orthologs of eukaryotic NE or NPC components.3 The endomembrane structures of
Planctomycetes then, however fascinating they are, probably evolved independently, and are
not informative when we try to understand the origin of the eukaryotic nucleus.
If prokaryotic endomembranes do not represent primitive stages in the development of
the eukaryotic nucleus we can only learn about the provenance of this compartment by
looking at its present composition. In a recent paper Mans et al.3 set out to do this in a
systematic manner by undertaking an exhaustive bioinformatic analysis of the known
components of the nuclear pore complex (NPC), the nuclear envelope (NE), and the
nuclear transport systems.3 Since the origin of a functioning nucleus cannot be envisaged
without parallel evolution of these subsystems (e.g., no closed NE can exist without
functioning NPCs) such an analysis is indispensable to formulate a detailed evolutionary
scenario. Mans et al. base their analysis on the 28 available eukaryotic genome sequences
and the catalogs of NE and NPC components obtained by genetic and proteomic analyses.4-7
The insights they gain into the origin of some of the NPC and NE proteins provide us
with invaluable information for finding out how the nucleus evolved.
As a first step Mans et al. look at the phyletic distribution of orthologous genes coding
for components of NPCs, the NE, and the nuclear lamina. Based on this comparativegenomic analysis they then try to reconstruct the protein complement of the Last
Eukaryotic Common Ancestor (LECA) and to build parsimonious scenarios for the gain
and loss of NE and NPC components during the evolution of different eukaryotic lineages.
The reconstruction of the ancestral gene set allows one to have inferences about the structure and biology of the ancestral NPC and NE (assuming that no major functional
changes occurred and thus functional data obtained mostly for yeast and animal cells apply
throughout eukaryotes). The gene gain-loss scenarios on the other hand reveal lineage
specific changes, such as evolutionary innovations at the origin of metazoa.
The main difficulty with the reconstructions is that the results largely depend on where
the root of the eukaryotic tree is positioned. Since no rooting is generally accepted Mans
et al. reconstruct parsimonious scenarios of the gain and loss of NPC and NE components
using two alternative topologies.8,9 The pictures obtained with the two rootings are
markedly different. Assuming that the root lies between plants and animals, the LECA had a very complex NPC and transport apparatus, equipped with most
of its present components (59 proteins), many of which have been
lost in Diplomonads and Kinetoplastids (Giardia and Leishmania
have NPCs with only 20 and 21 proteins, respectively). If, on the
other hand, Diplomonads, Kinetoplastids, and Alveolates are considered as basal groups, splitting off before the plant-animal divergence, one can see a progressive increase in complexity with the
LECA having only 19 NPC components, the common ancestor of
Alveolates and animals/plants 36, and the animal/plant common
ancestor, again, 59.
Mans et al. adopt the latter topology and discuss most of their
findings accordingly. However, the reader should keep in mind that
if the alternative rooting turns out to be the correct one, as suggested
by cell morphology,10 a derived gene fusion,8 concatenated mitochondrial protein trees,11 and Hsp90 trees12 (see also ref. 13), all
proteins referred to as specific for the ‘crown group’ had also been
present in the LECA (i.e., the 59 NPC proteins, etc.). Irrespective of
the rooting, however, it is clear that the NPC and the nuclear transport apparatus already formed a functional, multicomponent molecular machine in the LECA. The NPC had all three structural units
(central pore, cytoplasmic filaments, nuclear basket), and the transport machinery was already operating with the core set of karyopherins, the Ran cycle, and the Rix system for ribosomal subunit
export. An ancestral Src1p/Man1 protein was also present and presumably tethered the NE to chromatin.3
Since the basic structural units of the NPC and of the nuclear
transport system were present in the LECA their origin is beyond the
reach of comparative genomics. The important evolutionary steps
occurred in the eukaryotic stem lineage (i.e., the lineage leading to
the LECA and leaving descendants only through LECA) and no
intermediary forms survived. Nevertheless, there are other ways to
gain insights into the origin of those genes that largely lie, as Mans
et al. put it, “beyond our event horizon”. To achieve this, one has to
look for prokaryotic homologs or distant eukaryotic relatives of the
relevant molecules. Mans et al. do this for the entire dataset and
identify surprising connections that give us hints about the origin of
some of the NPC and NE components and suggest cell biological
scenarios about the origin and evolution of the nucleus.
Members of the karyopherin family play a central role in nucleocytoplasmic transport. Different members can have different directionalities and substrate specificities. Several karyopherins can be
traced back to the LECA and their evolution might give insights into
the diversification of karyopherin cargo specificities. The karyopherin snurportin1, for example, functions as a spliceosomal U
snRNP-specific nuclear import receptor. It has an N-terminal IBB
domain (or K-N module), similar to that of importin-α but differs
from all other karyopherins in having a C-terminal m3G-cap-binding region.14 Mans et al. found that this m3G-cap-binding domain
is homologous to the guanylyl transferase domain of the mRNA capping enzyme. The substrate binding residues characteristic of the
family are conserved in snurportin1, however, it lacks the catalytic
residues, suggesting that it is inactive. This similarity reveals how the
specific function of snurportin1 in the import of U snRNPs evolved
by the fusion of an IBB and a guanylyl transferase domain.
A combination of comparative genomics and similarity searches
revealed interesting aspects about the origin of the nuclear lamina as
well. Lamins, the primary components of the nuclear lamina are
specific for metazoa. These intermediate filament proteins are
composed of a long coiled-coil domain followed by a C-terminal
lamin-tail domain (LTD). When looking for homologs of the LTD,
Mans et al. found several uncharacterized proteins in diverse
prokaryotes but not in eukaryotes outside metazoa. This suggests
that the precursor of the animal LTD had been acquired from bacteria via horizontal gene transfer. Mans et al. argue that the evolution
of the nuclear lamina (following the fusion of a coiled-coiled domain
from an intermediate filament protein with the LTD) might have
been an adaptation to the greater contractile forces experienced by
animal cells.
Another example with interesting prokaryotic connections is the
Ran import factor, NTF2, and some other related nuclear proteins
having an NTF2 domain (Mtr2, Tap/Mex67, Bre5p). NTF2 is a
member of a structural superfamily the members of which are widespread in eubacteria and include proteins with diverse enzymatic and
small-molecule-binding properties (e.g., scytalone dehydratase,
3-oxo-Delta(5)-steroid isomerase, the β-subunit of naphthalene
dioxygenase).15 Structural comparisons suggest that the closest relatives of the eukaryotic NTF2 family are the eubacterial steroid
isomerases. It seems that the versatility of this family in binding
small molecules was exploited for peptide recognition during the
evolution of eukaryotic NTF2.3
Steroid isomerases are prevalent in α-proteobacteria, and NTF2
may have originated from the proto-mitochondrial endosymbiont.3
The uptake of an α-proteobacterium, the ancestor of mitochondria,
by the proto-eukaryotic (prekaryotic) host provided ample opportunities for the transfer of α-proteobacterial genes to the host genome.
Though it is not possible to carry out phylogenetic analysis in most
cases, Mans et al. suggest that many of the NPC components are of
α-proteobacterial origin. This could mean that the endosymbiotic event
predated the formation of the nucleus. This may also be true for the
perfection of mitosis since eukaryotic separases, proteases required
for sister chromatid segregation, also have close relatives in α-proteobacteria.16
The uptake of an α-proteobacterium may have predated, or even
triggered, the segregation of the nuclear compartment. The nuclear
envelope then evolved from primitive secretory endomembranes
already present, together with the ability to phagocytose other cells,
in the prekaryotic cell. This scenario is now further substantiated by
the identification of evolutionary links between components of the
NPC and secretory endomembranes. Mans et al. found that the
nuclear pore protein Nup107 (Nup84 in yeast) contains a conserved
domain that is present in other Nups and the Sec31p (Web1p)
family of proteins constituting subunits of the COPII coat, a complex
that envelops transport vesicles at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER).
The presence of a shared domain in some NPC proteins and the
vesicular coat proteins of the ER suggests a common origin for the
structural components of the NPC and ER-derived vesicular coats.
An even broader evolutionary relatedness of NPC proteins and
components of coated vesicles has been recognized by others in a
recent paper presenting a structural analysis of seven proteins of the
yNup84/vNup107-160 subcomplex, a core building block of the
NPC.17 Computational and biochemical studies revealed close
similarities between yNup84/vNup107-160 proteins and components
of all of the major types of vesicle coating complexes, including
clathrin/adaptin, COPI, and COPII coats. These findings again
pointing at a common origin of coated vesicles and the NPC. The
primordial NPC may thus be envisaged as a defective vesicle budding
complex enveloping and curving membranes linked to the chromatin.
The original function of such a complex—being unable to form
carrier vesicles—might have been to prevent complete fusion of
membranes around chromatin.10 These exciting novel findings leave

little doubt that the NE and its NPCs evolved autogenously by the
modification of secretory endomembranes and vesicle coat complexes,
and present a real challenge for symbiogenetic theories on the origin
of the nuclear compartment.17
The autogenous origin of the nucleus has to be interpreted within
the general framework of the evolution of eukaryotic endomembranes.10 Some of the steps of endomembrane evolution, including
the origin of the nucleus, may be traced by inspecting the history of
Ras-family small GTPases.18 As a member of the family, Ran is
essential for the definition of the nucleus. It regulates the assembly
of the NE and NPCs after mitosis, nuclear trafficking in interphase
cells, and the formation of a mitotic spindle.19-22 Proteins of the Ran
cycle comprise the most highly conserved unit among all NPC
components. Ran, RanGAP, NTF2, RanBP1 and RanGEF are nearly
ubiquitous in eukaryotes.3 Given its central importance in nuclear
function it is likely that the origin of the nucleus and mitosis were
associated with the advent and evolution of the Ran-cycle machinery.
As Mans et al. emphasize Ran differs from all Ras-like GTPases in
having a conserved proline followed by a C-terminal acidic tail,
instead of having conserved cysteins which undergo fatty-acid
modification in most of the other Ras-family GTPases. The loss of
this membrane targeting signal and the recruitment of Ran or
RanGEF to the chromatin established the Ran system as a positional
marker for the chromosomes and was probably an early and major
step in the evolution of the nucleus.18
The data presented by Mans et al. clearly represent an indispensable resource for cell biologists and besides prompting them to view
beyond their selected model organism will help them to formulate
experimentally testable predictions. The data will also be useful for
evolutionary biologists who are interested in reconstructing the
ancestral endomembrane architecture of prekaryotic cells and to
formulate cell biological scenarios about how the nuclear compartment
(and the first eukaryotic cell) evolved. Mans et al., though very rigorous in their analyses, are extremely cautious with speculations
about things that happened beyond the event horizon (i.e., before
the LECA). It is evident, however, that these early steps can only be
tackled by scenario building, by evolutionary constrained speculations. Such attempts will profit tremendously from the novel constraints introduced in the form of unexpected histories and homologies by this careful and extensive bioinformatic study.
The work by Mans et al. is another example to demonstrate that
an evolutionary perspective is indispensable if we want to understand
the make-up of highly complex cellular machines. As Eugene Koonin
wrote: “Since the organisms and their genomes have been shaped by
the haphazard, and yet, highly efficient process of evolution, any
understanding of these systems attained without formulating the
principles and reconstructing the specifics of evolution will be shallow
at best, and more likely, misleading.”