Origin of phagotrophic eukaryotes as social cheaters in microbial biofilms
Abstract
Background
The origin of eukaryotic cells was one of the most dramatic evolutionary transitions in the history of life. It is generally assumed that eukaryotes evolved later then prokaryotes by the transformation or fusion of prokaryotic lineages. However, as yet there is no consensus regarding the nature of the prokaryotic group(s) ancestral to eukaryotes. Regardless of this, a hardly debatable fundamental novel characteristic of the last eukaryotic common ancestor was the ability to exploit prokaryotic biomass by the ingestion of entire cells, i.e. phagocytosis. The recent advances in our understanding of the social life of prokaryotes may help to explain the origin of this form of total exploitation.

Presentation of the hypothesis
Here I propose that eukaryotic cells originated in a social environment, a differentiated microbial mat or biofilm that was maintained by the cooperative action of its members. Cooperation was costly (e.g. the production of developmental signals or an extracellular matrix) but yielded benefits that increased the overall fitness of the social group. I propose that eukaryotes originated as selfish cheaters that enjoyed the benefits of social aggregation but did not contribute to it themselves. The cheaters later evolved into predators that lysed other cells and eventually became professional phagotrophs. During several cycles of social aggregation and dispersal the number of cheaters was contained by a chicken game situation, i.e. reproductive success of cheaters was high when they were in low abundance but was reduced when they were over-represented. Radical changes in cell structure, including the loss of the rigid prokaryotic cell wall and the development of endomembranes, allowed the protoeukaryotes to avoid cheater control and to exploit nutrients more efficiently. Cellular changes were buffered by both the social benefits and the protective physico-chemical milieu of the interior of biofilms. Symbiosis with the mitochondial ancestor evolved after phagotrophy as alphaproteobacterial prey developed post-ingestion defence mechanisms to circumvent digestion in the food vacuole. Mitochondrial symbiosis triggered the origin of the nucleus. Cilia evolved last and allowed eukaryotes to predate also on planktonic prey. I will discuss how this scenario may possibly fit into the contrasting phylogenetic frameworks that have been proposed.

Testing the hypothesis
Some aspects of the hypothesis can be tested experimentally by studying the level of exploitation cheaters can reach in social microbes. It would be interesting to test whether absorption of nutrients from lysed fellow colony members can happen and if cheaters can evolve into predators that actively digest neighbouring cells.

Implications of the hypothesis
The hypothesis highlights the importance of social exploitation in cell evolution and how a social environment can buffer drastic cellular transformations that would be lethal for planktonic forms.

Background
The origin of eukaryotes from prokaryotic ancestors involved profound changes in cellular architecture [1]. The exact order and causation of these changes are still intensely debated [2-6], but there is an emerging consensus regarding the key cellular features already present in the last eukaryotic common ancestor. These include, among others, the presence of mitochondria, a dynamic endomembrane system comprising endosomes, lysosomes, phagosomes, autophagosomes, nuclear compartmentalisation, an endoplasmic reticulum, a Golgi-complex, actin-based lamellipodia, and a centriole-based cilium [7-9].

Although several models have been proposed on the origin of eukaryotes, here I distinguish two major model types that differ in one important aspect regarding the timing of the acquisition of key eukaryotic features. In one model type the primary event in eukaryogenesis is a symbiosis, a merger of two distinct prokaryotic lineages [2,3,10-12]. This symbiotic event, sometimes imagined starting off as a metabolic association [2,3,11], is then thought to have triggered all subsequent cellular changes, including the origin of endomembranes. In the alternative model the development of an endomembrane system, and most importantly of phagotrophy, precedes the symbiotic acquisition of a protomitochondrium [4,5,13].

The recognition that all extant amitochondriate protists once harboured mitochondria [14-18] seemed to tip the balance in favour of symbiosis-first models [2,19]. However, the presence of mitochondria in the last eukaryotic common ancestor (cenancestor) does not necessarily mean that mitochondria came before phagotrophy since phagotrophy was also present in the cenancestor [8]. Phagotrophy-first models are therefore as valid as ever [20,21].

The ancestry of phagotrophy is evidenced by its broad phyletic distribution among eukaryotes [22]. Among Unikonts, representing one major branch of the eukaryotic tree [8], Metazoa, Amoebozoa [23], Choanoflagellates [24], and several other protist groups are phagotrophic [25]. Fungi lost the ability of phagocytosis early in their evolution [26]. The closest known relative to fungi, the amoeboid protist Nuclearia, is a phagotroph [25]. Basal fungi can also have amoeboid phases such as the zoospores of some Chytridiomycota [26]. The pathogenic basal fungus Rozella allomycis can even phagocytose organelles of its host [27]. Among Bikonts (Plantae, Alveolata, Rhizaria, Excavata, Chromista) [8,28-31], representing the other branch of the eukaryotic tree, phagocytosis is also widespread [22]. With the exception of Plantae all major Bikont groups contain phagotrophic taxa [4,30-33].

If the eukaryotic tree is rooted between Unikonts and Bikonts [8,28], the eukaryotic cenancestor was clearly phagotrophic. This remains true even if the tree is rooted on Diplomonads (e.g. Enteromonas, Giardia) or Parabasalids (e.g. Trichomonas), formerly believed to be early branching, because these taxa are also phagotrophic [34-36]. Based on the presence of a T3/T7-like polymerase in all mitochondrial genomes except Jakobids it has been suggests that these protists may be early branching [37,38]. Jakobids are also phagotrophs [39] so a rooting between them and the rest of eukaryotes would still mean that the cenancestor was phagotrophic.

The ancestral presence of phagotrophy in eukaryotes means that all models of eukaryogenesis have to account for its origins. To date none of the symbiotic scenarios is sufficiently developed to explain why a prior endosymbiosis triggered the development of phagotrophy. If the order of origins is reversed, the problem disappears: phagotrophy can easily account for the acquisition of symbionts (the phagotrophic origin of plastids is generally accepted). Phagotrophy-first models have therefore primarily to account for the origin of an endomembrane system and phagotrophy from a non-phagotrophic prokaryotic ancestor.

Here I present a novel scenario on the origin of phagotrophy and other eukaryotic features that emphasizes the social context of the prokaryote-eukaryote transition. I propose that eukaryotes originated in a multicellular bacterial mat or biofilm through social conflict and a continuing evolutionary arms race. I will show that a social scenario can help to explain both how phagotrophic exploitation originated and how the drastic cellular transitions (e.g. the loss of a rigid cell wall) could have occurred without a severe reduction in fitness of the transitional forms.

It has become increasingly recognised in recent years that a wide variety of prokaryotes lives in biofilms, highly structured multicellular, often multispecies communities. [40-42]. Biofilms are composed of microcolonies encased in an extracellular polymer matrix [43] that form on surfaces during a highly ordered developmental sequence [40]. The formation of biofilms starts with the attachment of cells to the surface and continues with the secretion of an extracellular matrix. Biofilms eventually mature into a stratified structure with marked differences in cellular morphologies and gene expression patterns between cells in the outside and the inside [44,45]. During biofilm maturation the extracellular matrix forms a network of channels facilitating nutrient and water exchange in the interior of the biofilm [40]. From mature biofilms individual cells, spores or cell clusters shed off and disperse to re-initiate the developmental cycle at colonisable surfaces [46-48].

The formation of biofilms is a social strategy that involves a costly contribution from the cooperating individuals and confers a fitness-benefit to the group [49] (but see also [50]). The costs can include the production of a developmental signal, an extracellular matrix, digestive enzymes or altruistic self-sacrifice. The benefits include, among others, a decreased risk of predation, an increased resistance to antibiotics or toxic environmental conditions and more effective resource exploitation [51-54]. In social microbes dispersal is restricted to a fraction of the group and depends on the altruism of non-dispersing colony members. Altruistic members can for example form a fruiting body stalk or supply nutrients to dispersing cells by autolysis. Lysis can be induced either cell autonomously as part of biofilm maturation [47,55] or by the dispersing cells that secrete a killer toxin [56].

As in all social systems the benefits of cooperation can be undermined by selfish 'cheaters' that use, but do not contribute to a collectively produced fitness-enhancing resource. As a result, cheaters can grow faster and can be overrepresented during dispersal. The emergence of cheaters from within a cooperating social group has been described in several cases, including prokaryotic and eukaryotic microbes and viruses [49,57-60]. The analysis of frequency-dependent cheater fitness by evolutionary game theory predicts that some cheater genotypes should persist over long evolutionary time [61]. There is also theoretical [62] and experimental [63] evidence that cheater genotypes can coexist with their social kin over several cycles of competition.

A game theoretical approach is very useful to analyse the social interactions in microbes [61]. In game theory, interacting players with distinct strategies compete for a fitness enhancing benefit [1,64]. The gain of each player depends on the strategy of other players. In the case of social microbes, instead of considering two players, one can conceive a large group of cells within which subpopulations have distinct genotypes and social strategies [61]. In a social microbial framework, cells can either cooperate (form a fruiting body stalk etc.) or defect and become potential cheaters. The benefit of cooperation vs. defection depends on the frequency of the players exhibiting each strategy and on the extent of defection. This can range from non-contribution to direct exploitation (e.g. predation). The benefit of each strategy can be represented in a fitness matrix (Fig. ​(Fig.1).1). Mutual cooperators receive a fitness benefit, R, the 'reward for cooperation'. A small group of defectors within a large group of cooperators receives T, the 'temptation to defect'. If defectors are at high abundance, they receive P, the 'punishment for mutual defection'. Exploited cooperators receive S, the 'suckers payoff'. If the fitness enhancing benefit depends on the cooperative action of a social group, the matrix of frequency dependent payoffs is best represented by the 'chicken game' [61]. In the chicken game the benefit of defectors is higher then that of cooperators when they are at low abundance but falls below cooperator benefit when defectors reach a critical abundance (T>R>S>P) [61].

The 'prisoner's dilemma', another matrix of fitness relationships, seems to be less suited to describe the fitness relationships for social microbes. In the prisoner's dilemma, cheating always has a fitness advantage over cooperation (T>R>P>S). This fitness matrix corresponds to cases where an independent resource is being exploited, such as a growth medium by bacteria [59] or a cell's cytoplasm by viruses [60].

The game theoretical framework describes the fitness gain of each genotype during one repetition of the game. During several rounds of social aggregation and dispersal, the game is always repeated and the long-term evolutionary outcome will depend on the fitness matrix. The fitness relationships in the chicken game can maintain genetic polymorphism because both types have a selective advantage when rare [63]. Besides the fitness matrix, the long-term coexistence of defector and cooperator genotypes also critically depends on the mode of dispersal and the dynamics of formation of social aggregation. If dispersal and colonisation happen by single cells, the survival of defectors is not possible since they are not able to build social groups alone. However, if dispersal happens through clusters of cells (e.g. by clusters of spores or by the detachment of larger fragments from the social group [47]) defector genotypes can be maintained. Social aggregation following dispersal of single cells can also lead to defector persistence [62].

Cheating and stronger forms of exploitation can undermine the stability of social groups and can even lead to the extinction of a social colony [63]. The presence of cheaters, presenting a 'cheater load' to the social group, is expected to lead to the evolution of strategies by which social groups can restrain or exclude cheaters. There are several theoretically possible mechanisms for cheater control, including intrinsic cheater inferiority or active policing strategies [65]. It is also possible that cheaters evolve ways to avoid the policing strategies that can lead to an evolutionary arms race between cheaters and cooperators.

Here I propose that the evolutionary transition from social prokaryotes to eukaryotic phagotrophs may have had transitory stages where protoeukaryotes played as cheaters in the social game of microbial biofilms. Cheaters later evolved into professional predators because of an ongoing evolutionary arms race between them and their cooperating host. I present a selective scenario for the origin of phagotrophy and discuss it from a game theoretical perspective. I also describe how this selective scenario can explain major cellular transformations during eukaryogenesis.

Presentation of the hypothesis
A social selective framework for the origin of phagotrophic exploitation
The ancestral feeding strategy of eukaryotes is based on the phagotrophic ingestion of other cells and intracellular digestion. I propose that such phagotrophic exploitation originated as a social cheater strategy in the interior of a social prokaryotic biofilm. Here I describe a selective scenario that can explain a gradual increase in the exploitation of a group of cell (the social host) by another one (the protoeukaryotes).

In the selective framework I propose, the relationship between cheater fitness and frequency is consistent with the fitness matrix of the chicken game (Fig. ​(Fig.1).1). With the increase of the magnitude of social exploitation during the origin of phagotrophy the relative magnitude of the fitness values remains unchanged (T>R>S>P) but the absolute values change (T increases, S decreases). When cheater abundance is low, cellular-level selection will favour cheater genotypes conferring higher levels of exploitation. Such 'local competition' is known to favour the spread of cheaters [66,67]. When cheaters are abundant, the density of the population decreases [68]. After reaching a critical cheater frequency, a colony will fail to produce dispersing cells and will go extinct. Colony-level selection or 'global competition' therefore restricts cheaters and promotes cooperation [67]. In this selective scenario, it is expected that cheater efficiency will continuously increase while genetic polymorphism is maintained. Parallel with increased exploitation the number of cheaters a social colony can support decreases. This way the overall cheater load of social groups remains constant. Cellular-level selection can thus drive an increase in exploitation while colony-level selection allows the long-term persistence of cheaters during several rounds of dispersal and social development.

I propose that in parallel with the evolution of cheating by protoeukaryotes the social host evolved active policing strategies [65]. By policing the host tried to discriminate, exclude or kill cheaters. As policing strategies evolved only those protoeukaryotes survived that were able to evolve mechanisms of avoidance. This situation could have led to an evolutionary arms race between the social host and the cheaters, similar to antagonistic coevolution between a host and its pathogens [69].

Below I describe how the two major selective factors, namely for increased exploitation and for the avoidance of policing strategies, could have driven cellular changes during eukaryogenesis.

Cellular changes of eukaryogenesis driven by social conflict
Detailed, cell biologically sound evolutionary scenarios for many of the cellular changes during eukaryogenesis have been presented [4,5,13,21,70-72]. These scenarios are cell biologically realistic and are backed by bioinformatic and structural analyses of cellular components. I will here consider some critical major steps without much cell biological detail and place these in the social cheater scenario. It is therefore not the cell biological scenario that is novel here, but the attempt to define the social, ecological causation of these changes in more detail.

A plausible sequence of changes I propose is the following: social cheating, predation by extracellular digestion and diffuse nutrient uptake, cell wall loss, development of secretory and endocytic membranes, development of amoeboid motility allowing migration between colonies, development of phagotrophy to maximize feeding efficiency, uptake and enslavement of an alphaproteobacterium, switch from fermentation to respiration, origin of the nucleus triggered by mitochondrial symbiosis, development of cilia allowing planktonic predation, eukaryotic radiation. Although this sequence may seem arbitrary, the order of many of these steps is strongly constrained (e.g. phagotrophy could not have evolved in a cell with a rigid cell wall; cilia had to evolve after endomembranes etc., see [4,5,13,21,70-72] for further cell biological details).

Protoeukaryotic cheaters could have originated by reducing their contribution to a cooperatively produced fitness enhancing resource, e.g. by suppressing an altruistic autolysis program. Cheaters thus benefited from the altruism of social colony members without contributing equally. Later cheaters could have evolved mechanisms to actively trigger the autolysis of some host cells to further benefit from the excess nutrients released.

According to most models, the rigid prokaryotic cell wall had to be lost early during eukaryogenesis and it could have conferred resistance to antibiotics [20]. In the social cheater model, it can be explained as an adaptation to avoiding policing strategies targeting the cell wall. The social host could have evolved novel cell wall synthesis inhibitory antibiotics (and the necessary resistance traits) to exclude cheaters. Cheaters that survived cell wall synthesis inhibition (e.g. by internally rigidifying their plasmamembrane) avoided further cell wall policing. Cell wall loss was possible because the interior of biofilms provided osmotic, chemical and mechanical protection thereby buffering this radical cellular transformation. Subsequently protoeukaryotes could lyse host cells by secreting cell-wall digestive enzymes, without a risk of self-digestion. Cheaters thus evolved into cell wall-less predatory 'protoplasts' that externally digested other cells of the colony and took up diffusing nutrients. Secretion was not wasteful since biofilms limited diffusion and digestive enzymes could reach high concentrations.

After cell wall loss the plasmamembrane could be tubulated, vesiculated or protruded by the developing cytoskeleton. The cytoskeleton, evolving from filament systems present in prokaryotes [73-77], provided tensional integrity to the wall-less cells and a scaffold for vesicle trafficking. The first endomembranes were probably secretory tubules continuous with the plasma membrane that re-formed after each cell division [5]. The development of the first endomembranes allowed protoeukaryotes to secrete enzymes and to take up nutrients more efficiently. Novel policing strategies could also have contributed to driving endomembrane development. The host could have developed novel antibiotics to control protoeukaryotes. The signal peptidase, the signal peptide cleaving serine protease located on the extracellular side of the plasmamembrane, could have represented an easy antibiotic target (e.g. to arylomycins and beta-lactames [78,79]). Its inhibition could have provided a means for the host to interfere with protoeukaryote secretion. The signal peptidase of protoeukaryotes was directly exposed to the extracellular space and hiding it in intracellular tubules could have reduced its accessibility.

Lamellipodial motility, relying on actin-dependent membrane protrusion, adhesion and contraction, evolved to increase the efficiency of predation. For the first time in the history of life a flexible membrane and an underlying dynamic cytoskeleton could be used for protruding, adhering, sensing and signalling, and allowed protoeukaryotes to disperse actively inside the colony and also to invade other colonies by amoeboid motility on surfaces. Protoeukaryotes became generalist predators. With the evolution of active motility, protoeukaryotes relied less and less on passive dispersal (e.g. inside clusters of spores) and could actively forage their environment. As protoeukaryotes became independent from their social ancestor, their susceptibility to policing strategies also decreased. The selective forces became largely independent of the social context and further evolution was driven by the efficiency of predation.

Phagotrophy evolved as the most efficient system of predatory exploitation. It reduced the amount of digestive enzymes to be secreted and allowed the complete uptake of an engulfed cell's material [4]. I propose that besides providing more efficient food uptake, phagotrophy also had a decisive influence on protoeukaryote catabolism. In heterotrophs, generally there is a trade-off between the rate and the yield of ATP production (high rate but low yield versus low rate but high yield). One mole of glucose can for example be metabolised by respiration, yielding ~ 32 moles of ATP, but at a low rate. Glycolysis and fermentation yield only 2 moles of ATP per mole glucose, but at a higher rate [80]. If a cell uses a pathway with high yield and low rate it can produces more ATP per mole glucose and can consequently grow more from a given amount of resource. However, if such a cell is in resource competition with other cells that produce ATP at a higher rate but low overall yield, it will be in disadvantage [80]. The cells using the higher rate pathway (such as fermentation) will grow faster, even though they exploit the common resource inefficiently [81]. Generally if single-celled heterotrophs exploit external resources in a non-cooperative manner their growth-rate is maximal if they use reactions with the highest rate of ATP production even if at lower overall yield (e.g. fermentation of external sugars by Lactobacilli [80,82]). In contrast, if an internal resource is utilised (such as in animals or phagotrophs) using pathways with maximal ATP yield, even if at a lower rate, is expected to be favoured [80]. This could mean that with the evolution of internal resource use (phagotrophy) there was a strong selective pressure for pathways with higher yield of ATP production. Protoeukaryotic phagotrophs could have attained this by enslaving a respiring alphaproteobacterial prey. Phagotrophy and mitochondrial respiration were therefore synergistic in the evolution of efficient energy generation. Importantly, alphaproteobacterial symbiosis into a non-phagotrophic, fermenting osmotroph would not have had the same advantage than a phagotrophic fermenter could have had. This difference in the 'usefulness of respiration' between osmotrophs and phagotrophs gives therefore further theoretical support to phagotrophy-early scenarios.

Mitochondrial symbiosis could have initiated as an alphaproteobacterial phagotrophic prey circumvented digestion in the food vacuole. As predator pressure increased with the evolution of phagotrophy bacterial prey started to evolve pre- and post-ingestion defence mechanisms (and continues to do so ever since [83,84]). Examples of present proto/eukaryotic endosymbioses indicate that engulfed bacterial prey can escape digestion and establish a permanent presence in a phagotroph [85,86]. After the escape from the neutralised food vacuole alphaproteobacteria were enslaved by the insertion of a host-encoded ADP/ATP carrier. Using alphaproteobacterial respiration phagocytosed food could be converted into ATP with a high yield. The symbiont gradually evolved into an organelle via endosymbiotic gene transfer to the host genome [87] and the evolution of mitochondrial targeting mechanisms [88].

Mitochondrial symbiosis had a decisive impact on eukaryotic cell architecture. The distinct cytoplasmic, endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondrial versions of Hsp70 chaperons of alphaproteobacterial origin indicate that the final stages of ER evolution could have overlapped with the establishment of mitochondria as an organelle [4,89]. The spread of group II self-splicing introns from protomitochondria may also have triggered the evolution of telomeres and linear chromosomes [90]. Mitochondrial symbiosis probably also had a critical role in the evolution of nuclear compartmentalisation [72,91,92]. Nuclear compartmentalisation evolved when a tubular-vesicular membrane system surrounded chromatin and nuclear pores started to function as selective molecular sieves. The nuclear envelope evolved autogenously from pre-existing secretory endomembranes, while nuclear pores evolved by the modification of vesicle-curving complexes already present on endomembranes and functioning in vesicle budding [4,5,70].

Cilia evolved autogenously after the nucleus and mitochondria as sensory-motile organelles [71,93,94]. Cilium-based motility allowed eukaryotes to conquer pelagic habitats and to predate on planktonic prey. Long-term pelagic foraging was facilitated by other important adaptations including the origin of self-digestion (autophagy) that allowed survival under starvation conditions by digesting parts of the cytoplasm [95]. These adaptations to pelagic predation were probably the final major steps in eukaryogenesis. Having developed highly efficient ingestion, energy conversion, motility, and sensory systems eukaryotes rapidly diversified and quickly invaded most habitats where prokaryotic prey was present. The ubiquity of eukaryotic predation also prevented any further attempts to phagotrophy.

The possible phylogenetic contexts of the emergence of protoeukaryotic cheaters
Given the widespread occurrence of social aggregation in prokaryotes [45,47,51,96-118] the hypothesis presented here in principle could fit into different phylogenetic settings. The aim of this paper is not to argue for any one of these in particular. Here I only briefly overview some of the more important phylogenetic frameworks that have been proposed and discuss how the cheater scenario could fit into them.

The mosaic nature of eukaryotic genomes consisting of genes of both eubacterial and archaebacterial affinity points to a fusion or symbiosis between members of these two groups [119-123]. Most parsimoniously, this can be explained as a merger of an archaebacterium (either stem or crown) and an alphaproteobacterium, the ancestor of mitochondria. A gammaproteobacterial [124] or myxobacterial [3] contribution to eukaryotes has also been proposed.

In the framework of the first scenario, social cheaters could have evolved from an archaebacterium in an archaebacterial biofilm. These cheaters then developed phagotrophy and internalised an alphaproteobacterium. Alternatively, cheaters may have developed in the stem lineage of the sister-groups archaebacteria and eukaryotes. According to the standard view of the tree of life archaebacteria or the stem archaebacteria/eukaryotes diverged from the last universal common ancestor independently from eubacteria (i.e. the universal tree is rooted between archaebacteria/eukaryotes and eubacteria).

In the 'neomuran' scenario [4,13] the stem lineage of archaebacteria/eukaryotes derives from a Gram-positive bacterium. This requires that the universal tree of life be rooted within Gram-negative bacteria for which strong arguments have recently been made [125]. In this scenario, wall-less cheaters were the ancestors of both archaebacteria (that re-evolved a rigid cell wall) and eukaryotes. Accordingly, cheaters could have evolved from Gram-positive, endospore forming bacteria. Phagotrophy could have evolved by the modification of the endospore formation pathway. There are striking similarities between the two processes. Both include the total engulfment of another cell by membrane invagination and fission. During both processes, the engulfing cell secretes hydrolytic enzymes to digest the septal cell wall (endospore formation) or the whole engulfed cell (phagocytosis). Interestingly, endospore formation can also be completed in the absence of the cell wall (i.e. by 'protoplasts') in Bacillus by adhesion and a ratchet mechanism [126].

In the myxobacterial scenario cheaters could have evolved from social myxobacteria [3,127]. As phagocytosis evolved an archaebacterium was internalised that evolved into the nucleus. An alphaproteobacterium was also phagocytosed subsequently and developed into mitochondria. Although many cell biological arguments can be made why an archaebacterium could not have evolved into a nucleus [21], it could still have provided archaebacterial genes.

Testing the hypothesis
The selective scenario for increasing social exploitation, a crucial aspect of the hypothesis, can be tested using experimental model systems of social microbes (e.g. Myxococcus, Bacillus). The social cheater model proposes that an evolutionary arms race between protoeukaryotic cheaters and their host led to changing strategies and changing molecular mechanisms of cheating. It would be interesting to study experimentally how cheaters can be controlled by policing mechanisms and how new cheater genotypes can evolve under policing pressure. This could be done using serial competition experiments between cheater and social genotypes during several generations. In principle, there should be an escape from any policing strategy.

Most research on the evolution of social strategies is carried out using soil-dwelling microbes such as Myxococcus and Dictyostelium. It would be interesting to see whether social conflict can also originate in marine microbial biofilms since these were the first social systems to have evolved [128] and their study is probably also more relevant to the origin of eukaryotes. Such experiments could be carried out using both eubacterial (e.g. Pseudomonas tunicata) and archaebacterial marine biofilm forming species.

The social cheater model specifically proposes that cell wall-less protoeukaryotes as protoplasts had better chances of survival inside biofilms than they would have had as planktonic forms. This could be tested experimentally for example the following way: one could generate a temperature-sensitive mutant in a cell wall synthesis pathway gene that leads to cell wall loss at the restrictive temperature. This strain can be labelled with one resistance and can be mixed with a differently marked parental strain at the permissive temperature. The cells can then be grown either as a biofilm or a suspension culture. Following a shift to the restrictive temperature and further growth one could plate the cells and count the frequency of both types.

Implications of the hypothesis
The importance of social conflict is widely appreciated in evolutionary biology. The social cheater hypothesis highlights the importance of social conflict in one of life's most dramatic evolutionary transitions, the origin of eukaryotic cells. The hypothesis also emphasizes how a social environment can buffer drastic cellular transformations that would be lethal for single-celled forms. The social framework can also provide a gradual cell evolutionary transition scenario from cheating to amoeboid and pelagic predation until the radiation of eukaryotes.
