Horizontal gene transfer and the earliest stages of the evolution of life

Abstract
Horizontal gene transfer (HGT) has been suggested to be the dominant hereditary process at the earliest stages of evolution. I examine this suggestion within the context of the problem of genetic parasites and suggest that extreme rates of transfer may in fact negatively impact evolutionary transitions. In regard to the proposal that HGT is Lamarckian, the apparent conflict between HGT and Darwinian evolution is easily avoided by considering HGT at the appropriate level of selection.

1. Introduction
Horizontal gene transfer (HGT), also called lateral gene transfer, describes a broad range of mechanisms by which genetic material can be transmitted between individuals without the requisite reproduction associated with vertical inheritance. A wealth of data demonstrate beyond doubt that HGT occurs between cells, viruses and plasmids [44], and can range from transfer between closely-related bacterial strains [21], [28], [39], to transfer between domains [15], [23]. Given clear evidence for the role of HGT in shaping genomes [1], [8], [16], [18], [39], a tree of life that describes the genetic relationships between organisms solely in terms of vertical inheritance of genes is insufficient [1], [7], [10], [11], [18], [32], [51]. Indeed, the small number of universally-conserved genes consistent with a tree of life [5], [22], [27] suggests that gene transfer is so pervasive that it may not be possible to describe the evolutionary relationships of microbes solely using phylogenetic trees built from DNA or protein sequences [7], [11]. Some workers have even suggested that currently recognised Darwinian processes of evolution are insufficient to account for HGT [11], favouring instead a Lamarckian take on this form of inheritance [19], [48]. I will argue that HGT among microbes is not at odds with our current understanding of Darwinian evolution, and conclude that it may be more helpful to view HGT from the perspective of the transferred genes themselves rather than in terms of impacts on recipient cells. Thinking in these terms better illustrates that genes evolve according to Darwinian processes, whether horizontally or vertically inherited.

Given the importance of HGT for understanding the biology and genetics of modern microbial systems, together with the recognition that some gene transfer events are demonstrably ancient [4], [24], it seems reasonable to suggest that this suite of processes also played a pivotal role early in the evolution of life, that is, prior to the emergence of the archaeal, bacterial and eukaryotic domains [50], [51], [52]. It has moreover been suggested that rates of HGT were not only significantly higher than among modern microbes but that HGT completely dominated gene flow early in evolution [48], [50], [51], [52].

While such suggestions certainly seem convincing, there is merit in evaluating these in light of what is already known about HGT and early evolution. Is it feasible to argue that transfer was so pervasive in early evolution that vertical inheritance was essentially insignifcant? In an attempt to address this, I examine a parallel between current speculation concerning the dominance of HGT prior to the divergence of the three domains [50], [51], [52] and the initial formulation of the hypercycle model [13], [14]. I also briefly consider the phenomenon of post-segregational killing, where competition between parasitic mobile elements involves strategies to reduce the spread of competitors.

Finally, while HGT undoubtedly has played an important role in the evolution of life on Earth, is it reasonable to assume HGT was the default state of the earliest biological systems? This is a difficult question to address, and is perhaps dependent upon the models proposed. I will suggest that, in some cases, it may be more productive to consider processes of HGT as having evolved not due to some direct advantage to recipient cells, but because these positively influence gene survival.

2. HGT and the inheritance of acquired characteristics
Acquisition and retention of foreign genes can perhaps be described as the inheritance of acquired characters [19]. The apparent limitation of neo-Darwinian thinking in dealing with acquisition of genetic material from external sources has been raised with regard to endosymbioses (whereby an entire organism is acquired and integrated into the biology of the host) [31], [38], and while there may have been legitimate concerns that in the past the received neo-Darwinian view was not particularly concerned with symbioses, conflict between endosymbioses and Darwinian theory has nevertheless been shown to be entirely illusory [34]. I will briefly explain why this is also the case for HGT.

The problem of accounting for a process such as HGT in Darwinian terms arises if thinking is constrained to cells (Fig. 1). If we think about HGT from the perspective of the recipient cell, it is clear that there can be subsequent vertical inheritance of horizontally transferred genes. It would thus seem that there is something fundamentally different about vertical inheritance and acquisition of genes by horizontal gene transfer. However, the description of HGT as a form of inheritance of acquired characteristics actually places undue focus on the recipient organism, and thus serves to obscure the underlying Darwinian evolution of the genes themselves. Considering only the genes, it becomes clear that the processes by which individual genes are replicated are identical under both horizontal and vertical inheritance. Genes are replicated, imperfectly, generating similar copies, and there is the propensity for the population of genes to change through time, via selection or drift.

It is certainly true that the recognition of HGT as a significant evolutionary process calls into question the validity of describing the history of life on Earth solely in terms of the relationship between species. That the genes do not strictly follow the pattern of inheritance observed through cell or organismal reproduction does not affect this Darwinian view of gene evolution. The only assumption that can no longer be said to hold in light of HGT is that the history of the cell is identical to the history of all its constituent genes (Fig. 1).

Continuing with a gene's-eye view, it becomes clear that gene transfer between different entities (viruses, plasmids and cells) facilitates gene interaction. This can lead to the formation and breakage of symbiotic interactions between genes, and these may be mutual (both entities benefit from the association – as is likely the case for many genes in the business of constructing cells), commensal (only one entity derives benefit; the effect on the other entity is neutral) or parasitic (one entity derives benefit, the other is disadvantaged). In an extreme gene-centric view of HGT, cells simply represent a collection of niches that genes may cohabit. Provided there is the possibility for the genes to replicate, the resulting variation may be subject to natural selection; this can occur regardless of whether transmission is vertical or horizontal.

To consider unicellular microbes solely in terms of gene interactions might risk implying that the cell has limited evolutionary significance. A distinction that recognises both the importance of the units of evolution and the central importance of cells is the definition of units of life[45]. The important point here is that units of evolution and units of life are two partially overlapping sets; viruses, plasmids or self-replicating genes can for instance be defined as units of evolution (they cannot reproduce unaided), whereas unicellular free-living microbes are both units of evolution and units of life. That bacterial and archaeal genomes are in flux, with genes being acquired and lost [21] simply indicates that there can be dynamic symbiotic interactions between cells (units of evolution and life) and genetic elements (units of evolution).

I will argue that in order to productively examine HGT in the context of early evolution, we must recognise this distinction between selection operating at the level of cells and selection operating at the level of individual genes. It is plausible that there was an evolutionary transition from genes to cells, with selection between cells ultimately dominating over selection between genes [36], [47].

3. Horizontal gene transfer and the notion of a Communal Ancestor
The idea that HGT was central to the evolution of early life is gaining widespread acceptance. Woese [50], [51], [52] in particular has developed a detailed scenario wherein HGT might have been dominant in early evolution, prior to the divergence of the three domains of life. The following quotes provide a useful précis of his ideas:
‘The ancestor cannot have been a particular organism, a single organismal lineage. It was communal, a loosely knit, diverse conglomeration of primitive cells that evolved as a unit, and it eventually developed to a stage where it broke into several distinct communities, which in their turn become [sic] the three primary lines of descent.’ (1) Woese 1998, p. 6858 [50]

‘…any lineages evolving barriers to acquisition or expression of foreign genes would be left behind in the evolutionary progression toward modern life. Lateral gene transfer of this kind and intensity would not only contribute significantly to but also would completely dominate the primitive evolutionary dynamic.’ (2) Woese 1998, p. 6858 [50]


I take these statements to mean that, in Woese's Communal Ancestor model:
1.
All cells exchanged genetic information through mechanism(s) of horizontal gene transfer.

2.
The Universal Ancestor1 was a single communal evolutionary unit. (‘Evolutionary units’ are discussed below.)

3.
Horizontal gene transfer completely dominated early evolution; vertical inheritance was largely insignificant.

4.
At the earliest stages in the evolution of life, there was selection against lineages that developed barriers to HGT.


One obvious advantage with such a model is that it offers a tidy solution to the problem of a ‘totipotent’ ancestor of modern cells [27], [40], that is, an ancestor with a broader metabolic repertoire than the most complex unicellular lineages present today. This would imply – improbably – that the Last Universal Common Ancestor (LUCA) was more complex than extant cells. While one recent estimate suggests LUCA may have possessed a surprisingly large gene repertoire (on the order of 1000 genes) [41], this cannot be equated with a totipotent ancestor. Invoking a Communal Ancestor model for LUCA (i.e. with HGT) resolves the totipotent ancestor dilemma since the diversity of genes that can be traced back may have been high, but HGT implies they did not reside in a single genome [27].

However a Communal Ancestor, with marginal vertical inheritance and active selection against barriers for HGT, faces another set of dilemmas. A Communal Ancestor enables a greater amount of genetic information to be maintained than in a single clonal lineage, but the suggestion that it ‘evolved as a unit’ (quote 1) implies that all members cooperate through the unrestrained sharing of genes.

What would it mean for the Communal Ancestor to ‘evolve as a unit’? A unit of evolution, sensu Maynard Smith [34], has the properties of multiplication, variation and heredity, and that the entity thus described is part of a population of entities. Compartmentation provides the conditions by which complex, stable, units of evolution can emerge from individuals with separate evolutionary histories. Whereas competition between the entities may prevent cooperation [34], [36], [47], compartmentation can create units that may compete with one another. A clear example of this is the Stochastic Corrector Model (described below and in Fig. 2). It is worth explicitly explaining the difference between ‘naïve’ group selection [49] and evolutionary transitions (where entities that were capable of independent replication before the transition can replicate only as part of a larger whole after it) [36]. A charge of ‘naïve’ group selection has been levelled against the Gaia hypothesis [9]: as per the idea of the entire Earth as a living organism, for the Communal Ancestor to evolve as a unit would require multiple Communal Ancestors in competition for the same set of resources, and that each Communal Ancestor could reproduce. This highlights a clear weakness with the Communal Ancestor model: it fails to take into account levels of selection, and thus seems to require some form of naïve group selection (i.e. that in spite of the possibility of competition between the component parts, communality will nevertheless prevail) [49].

A key question we must ask of the Communal Ancestor model is therefore whether it would be vulnerable to the action of parasites. That is, will it fall apart because of competition between the genes it is comprised of? I will therefore briefly review some key observations on the effects of parasites on the stability of hypercycles, which are also naïvely cooperative systems.

4. Parasites and HGT
The hypercycle model [13], [14] provided an elegant theoretical solution to the problem of maintaining sufficient genetic information for life to get started. The reasoning is as follows. If the minimal amount of information to be copied exceeds that which can be faithfully transmitted, the system will disintegrate due to the accumulation of mutations. With strong constraints on fidelity of replication come strong constraints on the length of sequence that can be accurately maintained, and it is not obvious how systems with a higher coding capacity could emerge [42], [43]. Fig. 3 shows how a hypercycle can abrogate this problem. In panel A, a genetic element with an informational content of 80 bits is shown. Let us arbitrarily assume that the error rate during replication in this system is 1 error per 40bits. Clearly then, at this level of fidelity, the information cannot be maintained. Panel B shows how a hypercycle of four genes with a total information content of 80 bits can be maintained at this error rate. This is possible because in a hypercycle each gene replicates itself and the next gene in the cycle. Consequently, each gene is independently replicated and is short enough to be maintained at this fidelity of replication, provided they are connected via a cooperative cycle.

While providing an elegant theoretical solution to the information problem, the hypercycle is vulnerable to competition between its components, making it unstable. This is the problem of levels of selection once again, and hypercycles are not obviously evolutionarily stable [33]. This is illustrated in Fig. 4A, where a mutant of one of the sequences emerges that can be preferentially replicated, but which provides limited replicative support to the next member of the hypercycle (i.e. the mutant is a parasite). Despite the charge of ‘naïve’ group selection, it turns out that hypercycles can in fact be stable against parasites, but only where there is spatial structuring such that parasites are restricted in their capacity to spread [2], [3] (Fig. 4B).

The implications for a Communal Ancestor are as follows. With no barriers to gene transfer, a replicating parasite that derives some benefit at the expense of its host (by host I mean the set of cooperating elements within a compartment), and which can spread horizontally, may be expected to rapidly spread to all members of the communal population. The consequence for a Communal Ancestor is akin to the effect of parasites on the hypercycle in the absence of barriers to parasite spread (Fig. 4A). Spatial structuring of the environment (e.g. growth on a surface as opposed to in a well-mixed medium) can presumably reduce the impact of mobile parasites on a complex web of gene transfer, but this would also mean that gene transfer itself is reduced. Exactly what ratio of horizontal to vertical transmission could be sustained in early cellular systems in the presence of parasites would presumably depend in part on the structuring of the environment (i.e. how environment affects parasite mobility) and the efficiency of infection by parasites.

5. The Communal Ancestor model and the spread of beneficial mutations
One appealing feature of the Communal Ancestor model is the effective spread of beneficial mutations to all members of the population. However, as addressed in the discussion of parasites above, one might expect this to apply equally to detrimental mutations. I assume that what is meant in the context of the Communal Ancestor model is that ‘beneficial’ mutants are those alleles that impart some selective advantage to the recipient cell, perhaps by improving cell function or growth. Note that this is the standard cell-centric view of the role of HGT in modern systems, and surely implies competition between cells as opposed to their cooperation. ‘Detrimental’ mutations on the other hand may either generate alleles that code for a less effective version of such a function than that already present in the cell, or they may be parasitic sequences that thrive at the expense of the host.

How would selection operate in such a system? Woese [50] suggests that the inability to receive the advantageous gene would be sufficiently detrimental as to cause a non-recipient cell to be eliminated from the population (quote 2, above). But under a model of indiscriminate transfer, neutral, deleterious and parasitic mutations would be spread equally effectively. If one assumes that there are many more neutral or deleterious mutations than advantageous mutations, the question is whether selection between these ‘alleles’ is possible under extreme rates of HGT. There are two options: alleles can either compete with one another within compartments (intracellular competition), or cells with different alleles would have differential fitness, and competition between cells would prevail. (A third possibility, competition for compartments, is discussed in Section 4.)

The problem, and a reasonable solution, are evident from an examination of the Stochastic Corrector Model [47]. In this model, competition between genes in the same compartment can be quelled by between-cell competition (Fig. 2), and is an elegant example of the centrality of multi-level selection to evolutionary transitions [36].

One important observation that can be drawn from the examination of different levels of selection in operation in the Stochastic Corrector Model is that what makes a successful replicator under intracellular competition does not necessarily make a successful replicator under intercellular competition: between-compartment selection may result in the elimination of the most effective intracompartmental replicators (Fig. 2).

In the extreme case where HGT is so rapid that all cells possess the same alleles, the result is that there can be no between-cell competition for the trivial reason that all cells are identical. Hence in this scenario there are in effect no compartments, and group selection will not operate. While this does not seem particularly realistic, a recent re-examination of the Stochastic Corrector Model [20] illustrates the nature of the problem. With varying compartment size (and keeping other parameters fixed – see [20] for details), large compartment size is observed to affect the efficiency of between-compartment selection because within-compartment competition will prevail.

The difficulties this presents for the Communal Ancestor model should be clear: high rates of transfer should approximate large compartments (i.e. large cells with many replicators) in that between-cell selection is reduced, and competition between replicators would be intense. So while any mutations that are beneficial to the recipient cells will indeed spread, so will all neutral, deleterious and parasitic mutations. The only obvious way for mutations that are beneficial to predominate over the other classes (and hence for constructive communal evolution by horizontal gene transfer) is if those genes that are beneficial are also those that compete most effectively, even in the presence of parasites.

Conditions have been identified where HGT operates constructively – in a simulation model for the evolution of the genetic code [48] – though the impact of parasites was not considered in that study. The important point of the Stochastic Corrector Model, apparently missed in formulations of extreme HGT in the Communal Ancestor model, is that within-cell competition is reduced by conditions that favour between-cell competition; I suspect that between-cell competition may in turn be better served by the existence of at least some barriers to HGT.

One further point that speaks against indiscriminate transfer is that linkage can serve to reduce competition between elements [35]. The point can be made in the following simple way: in a simple hypercycle with two replicators, competition between replicators can lead to cycle disintegration (as per Fig. 2A) if one replicator is better at being copied than it is at copying its partner. Linkage not only keeps together genes that must act in some coordinate manner, it eliminates competition since, if both replicators are present on the same chromosome, they will be replicated at the same rate [35]. (Note that here I am assuming that the chromosome is below the error threshold, i.e. it is not so long that it cannot be maintained at the current level of replication fidelity – see Ref. [42] for a mechanism by which higher fidelity systems can evolve from lower fidelity systems.) Mobile operons, which may either impart some benefit on the recipient or might in some cases be non-beneficial (as per post-segregational killing gene-couples – see below), might arguably represent the middle ground here [29], [30], though one should bear in mind that for any theory where element survival is dependent upon the host, one must also invoke the stable existence of hosts; gene transfer cannot be so extensive that a simple ‘reproducer’ cannot be maintained.

This last point requires a brief digression. Reproducers, which carry sets of cooperating genes sufficient to reproduce a cell, are important here in that, regardless of the exact model, there was presumably a transition from free replicators that may either compete or cooperate, to cellular systems where replicator competition is reduced and cellular competition emerges [46], [47]. In this sense, the Communal Ancestor model and the Stochastic Corrector Model are at least superficially similar in that both invoke a transition to cellular systems. One important difference is the complexity at which the evolutionary transition is invoked. The Stochastic Corrector Model requires only that there is sufficient complexity for compartmental reproduction. No explicit statement of complexity is given, though Gánti's chemoton model with metabolic, compartmentational and informational subsystems [17] (and references therein) could fulfil this reproductive requirement.

The Communal Ancestor model proposes three simultaneous evolutionary transitions (giving rise to the archaeal, bacterial and eukaryotic lineages) from the same cloud of genes by ‘genetic annealing’ or ‘crystallisation’ (i.e. a reduction in rates of horizontal gene transfer). Proposing that the transition to stable cellular lineages occurs at such a late and metabolically complex stage seems problematic in light of the issues raised above (naïve group selection, parasites, requirement for reproducers) and perhaps unnecessary given sound evolutionary arguments for the feasibility of earlier transitions [27] to stable cooperative units such as chromosomes [25] and cells [47].

6. Mobile elements that reduce the spread of competitors
So far I have argued that there appear to be difficulties with the Communal Ancestor model and its invocation of indiscriminate, dominant HGT, largely because it would be disruptive to the early evolution of cellular systems. I would now like to briefly consider post-segregational killing (PSK) plasmids as an example of elements that efficiently replicate via horizontal transmission. My motivation for discussing these elements is twofold. First, these elements both spread efficiently through bacterial populations and are effectively maintained in recipients via ‘addiction mechanisms’ [6], [25], [26]. Second, despite being effective horizontal transmitters, they in fact serve to reduce horizontal transmission because they prevent invasion by other DNA [6], [37].

PSK systems are biochemically diverse, and their general attributes are that they consist of a toxin gene and an antitoxin gene. Generally, the toxin activity is more stable than the antitoxin activity, which means that if a PSK plasmid is lost from a cell, the outcome is that the cell is poisoned by the long-lived toxin since it can no longer produce antitoxin. This enables effective fixation of the PSK element in a population because the plasmid is horizontally mobile and loss from the population is precluded as cells cured of the plasmid are killed by the toxin [6], [25], [26], [37].

PSK plasmids provide an example of a replicator with an extremely horizontal lifestyle, and an extremely successful mode of transfer and retention. However, while this form of element is adept at effective spread, this strategy also acts to prevent other elements from invading. Restriction-modification (RM) systems are particularly interesting in this respect. RM systems code for a restriction endonuclease and a modification methylase, which both recognise the same DNA sequence. The endonuclease will cleave the DNA at this sequence, though not if it has been methylated by its cognate modification methylase. DNA that enters a cell containing the plasmid-encoded RM system will be cleaved by the endonuclease. This has two effects. One is that any foreign DNA entering via conjugation, transformation or transduction is cleaved by the restriction endonuclease and hence inactivated (Fig. 5). This has been likened to a bacterial immune system, though this constitutes an overly simplistic view of PSK systems [26]. The second effect is that, as for all PSK systems, competing plasmids from the same incompatibility group are prevented from invading the population because displacement of the PSK plasmid results in cell death [37].

In the particular case of RM-based PSKs, one thus sees a two-tiered propensity for preventing competition and spread of other genetic elements; there is clearly a selective advantage for horizontal replicators to limit the spread of other such replicators, as these elements can be in direct competition for the resources of the host. The relative simplicity of such systems and the diversity of evolutionarily unrelated toxin–antitoxin couples suggests the general strategy may well have been in operation early in the evolution of life. The outcome would be a mechanism by which competition between elements may have reduced overall transfer rates.

7. Concluding remarks
HGT describes a series of mechanisms by which genes can move between genetic compartments, e.g. cells. The propensity for genes to interact symbiotically is centrally important to our understanding of HGT and it would seem naïve to assume such interaction was not a feature of early life. However, given that interaction of genes in different cells requires a means of getting between those cells, HGT itself is not likely to be a default state of biological systems. Transfer requires a physical mechanism and mechanism is in turn a product of natural selection.

The early major transitions, whether postulated and feasible, as with the hypercycle, or likely, as with chromosomes and cells, clearly involve symbiotic interactions between entities and the subsequent emergence of a stable evolutionary unit from those previously independent entities. What is interesting about HGT in this context is that, although it has been envisaged as a constructive force, and may in some cases be so [48], it may also be disruptive to the emergence of higher evolutionary units. Viewed within the context of symbioses, it is unlikely that HGT is either entirely constructive or entirely disruptive. The challenge to models for the origin of cells such as the Stochastic Corrector Model is how HGT will impact the emergence of stable higher evolutionary units. There is clearly scope for a range of effects because entities that are horizontally transmissable encompass a range of strategies. Horizontal transmission is an effective means for parasitic replicators such as viruses to access resources for their continued replication, but genes entering a compartment may equally have a propensity to interact mutualistically with incumbent genes.

The key point is that model of early evolution that considers horizontal gene transfer to be so dominant that there is no vertical inheritance (i.e. no lineages) must be critically examined to establish under what conditions the model can operate and, whether it can persist in the presence of parasites, and whether transfer is disruptive to reproducers (i.e. functional cells). It is worth noting at this point that the proposed near-absence of vertical transmission in early evolution [50] and the effect of horizontal gene transfer on the propensity to use genes to reconstruct the history of those genes thought to parallel vertical inheritance through reproduction [8], [11], [12], [32] are not necessarily the same thing; there is no a priori reason to expect that rates of transfer do not vary over evolutionary time and between lineages, nor is there any direct evidence that rates of transfer were higher at the earliest stages of life. As illustrated in Fig. 6, high levels of transfer during the evolution of the three domains do not necessarily require evocation of higher rates of horizontal gene transfer prior to the emergence of archaea, bacteria and eukaryotes.

If high rates of HGT are refractory to the emergence or stability of (cellular) biological systems (with genetic control, some form of metabolism for extracting and utilising energy from the environment, and a form of compartmentation), then we should be wary of uncritically embracing models that view HGT solely as a constructive force in the early evolution of life.


