The Drosophila Beat protein is related to adhesion proteins that contain immunoglobulin domains

Axon extension along the surface of other axons in the course of embryo development results in axon bundle formation (fasciculation), followed at the later stages by controlled defasciculation of axon subsets at defined choice points. The genetic and biochemical basis of fasciculation in chick and fruitfly embryos has been studied in some detail, and cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) have been shown to have a pivotal role in this process. One well-studied example is Fasciclin II (Fas II) of Drosophila, a membrane CAM containing immunoglobulin-like domains that enables axon fasciculation along the three longitudinal axon pathways [1]. Post-translational modifications (by phosphorylation and sialylation) of Fas II and of related chick CAMs, have been implicated in the control of fasciculation, presumably by affecting the extent of homophilic adhesion [2], [3].

Recently, a Drosophila gene, beaten path, has been shown to promote defasciculation by decreasing axon–axon adhesion. Motor axons fail to defasciculate in beaten path mutant embryos, and this phenotype is reversed in embryos in which both beaten path and genes encoding CAMs are mutant, consistent with the antagonistic roles of these two classes of proteins [4]. Beat, the product of the beaten path gene, is a secreated protein that was thought not to contain any known sequence motifs [4].

We applied the sensitive and selective BLAST2 algorithm [5] to search the non-redundant sequence database at NCBI (Bethesda, USA) with the Beat sequence. This search retrieved many classes of proteins with known immunoglobulin-like domains, including chicken CAMs, the T-lymphocyte activation protein CD80, the irregular chiasm C-roughest protein required for correct axonal pathway formation in the optic lobe of Drosophila, and Drosophila Fas III protein. The matches were in the amino-terminal half of Beat protein, and corresponded to the predicted immunoglobulin-like domains of the other proteins. Although probability of matching by chance was of moderate significance (p values of 10−2), the typical pairwise scores between Beat and other proteins were in the range of 90–100, indicating likely biological relevance of the observed similarities for a medium-sized protein with unbiased sequence composition [6]. Moreover, searching of the expressed sequence tags (EST) database with Beat sequence detected the putative products of a human and a mouse EST — T08949 and AA155245 — that were even more closely related to Beat, and displayed statistically significant similarity to this protein (scores 118 and 109, and probabilities of matching by chance 10−5 and 10−4, respectively). The EST database search also retrieved many immunoglobulin-domain proteins at statistically significant levels when used as queries in the further rounds of database searches. Multiple sequence alignment detected two immunoglobulin-like domains in the Beat sequence (Figure 1), with invariant residues and predicted secondary structure conforming to the known pattern of sequence conservation in diverse immunoglobulin-like domains [7], [8]. Some of the similarities between Beat and the immunoglobulin-domain proteins could also be observed using the conventional BLAST algorithm [9], after filtering out the carboxy-terminal, low-sequence-complexity segment of Beat protein with the SEG program [10]. Thus, Beat seems to be a secreted immunoglobulin-domain protein.

Interestingly, the putative immunoglobulin-like domains of Beat also matched regions in a group of human pregnancy zone proteins, not previously reported to be immunoglobulin-related. Database search using pregancy zone protein sequences revealed that they, too, contain multiple immunoglobulin-like domains. For example, the probability of matching by chance between human pregnancy-specific β-1 glycoprotein D and human B-cell receptor CD22B, a bona fide immunoglobulin-domain CAM [11], was computed, by BLAST2 program, to be less than 10−9, with a similarity score of 150. The complete sets of immunoglobulin domains in the pregnancy zone proteins and related carcinoembryonic antigens remains to be determined.

Surprisingly, the carboxy-terminal half of Beat protein immediately downstream of the immunoglobulin-like domains matched, in BLAST2 search, the human paraoxonase sequence (similarity score 97; data not shown). The catalytic mechanism and structure–function relationships of paraoxonase are unclear [12], and it is not yet possible to predict whether Beat possesses paraoxonase-like enzymatic activity. The presence of the tandem immunoglobulin-like domains in Beat defasciculation protein has implications for its function. It has been suggested that FasII and other immunoglobulin-domain CAMs promote fasciculation by homophilic and heterophilic adhesion, mediated by their immunoglobulin domains [1], [13]. A secreted immunoglobulin domain might bind by homophilic adhesion to the membrane-bound immunoglobulin domain of CAM, thereby reducing its interaction with other cell surfaces. Detailed structural modelling and direct biochemical experimentation will answer the question of whether Beat indeed promotes defasciculation by CAM displacement.
