Refining structural and functional predictions for secretasome components by comparative sequence analysis

Abstract
Comparative sequence analysis of presenilins reveals the conserved transmembrane domain shared with leukocyte antigen CD47, possibly involved in signal transduction. Sensitive techniques of multiple sequence alignment extend the earlier observation of the aminopeptidase homology domain in nicastrin to suggest that this protein may be a catalytically active component of secretasome involved in proteolysis or co‐proteolysis of presenilin or β‐amyloid.

INTRODUCTION
Cleavage of transmembrane proteins within the plane of membrane by specialized proteases (intramembrane proteolysis) is a process of regulated release of protein fragments with discrete functions to their extracellular or intracellular destinations.1 Presenilin‐1 (PS1) is a multipass membrane protein first identified on the basis of prevalence of a mutated form of its cognate gene in families with familiar Alzheimer disease (AD)2 and later reported to be a regulator of intramembrane proteolysis. The proteins that require the presence of PS1 for processing include the following: animal developmental regulator Notch, whose cytosolic fragment is set free from the membrane‐bound part of the molecule, translocates to the nucleus and induces expression of transcription activators of bHLH family3-5; a component of the unfolded protein response, protein‐kinase/endonuclease Ire1, whose cytosolic domain detaches from the membrane after intramembrane proteolysis and uses its nuclease moiety to cleave the mRNA, and thereby activates the translation, of the downstream effector Hac16, 7; and, in the best studied example, the amyloid precursor protein (APP), which is mostly processed into benign peptides, but may give rise to the AD‐associated amyloid β‐peptide, either when itself mutated, or at the background of mutated PS1.1, 8-10 Proteolysis at a hydrophobic, presumably membrane‐buried site is the crucial last step in the amyloid β‐maturation, and the activity required for this event, called γ‐secretase, remained elusive until PS1 has been directly implicated.

Involvement of Presenilin and Nicastrin in Proteolysis
It has been proposed that two transmembrane segments (TM‐6 and TM‐7) in PS1 each contain an aspartic acid residue positioned at the same depth relative to the plane of the membrane, and mutations of either of these two residues to alanines have been shown to reduce the β‐amyloid maturation.11-13 In addition, the cleavage of PS1 itself, in the cytoplasmic loop between TM‐6 and TM‐7, was affected by the same mutations.11 Both aspartates are conserved in PS1 homologs in other species, and in the human paralog presenilin‐2 (PS2), which is mutated in different cohorts of the Alzheimer patients.14-16 In an analogy with catalytic centers of known cytoplasmic and membrane‐bound aspartic hydrolases,1, 17, 18 it is believed that the two aspartic acid residues form a catalytic pair. The γ‐secretase activity of the pure PS1, however, remains to be shown. Also unclear is the precise mechanism of maintaining the crucial for human health balance between a shorter, benign form of amyloid β (Aβ40, cleaved after the amino acid 40 of the 99‐residue A4CT precursor), and the longer, disease‐associated form (Aβ42, cleaved after the amino acid 42 and maintained at low levels in healthy individuals), which may be the alternative products of the γ‐secretase reaction.

A single‐span membrane protein nicastrin forms stoichiometric complexes with PS1 and PS2 in vivo and is involved in processing of both Notch and APP, suggesting the existence of a functional complex, “secretasome.”19 Recently, Genome Threader, a modification of the GenTHREADER method20 was used to detect, within nicastrin sequence, a domain related to peptidase/transferrin receptor superfamily.21 That superfamily of Zn‐dependent hydrolases includes peptidases of the M28B family and endoglucanases, as well as catalytically inactive proteins with peptidase‐like motifs, such as transferrin receptor. Enzymatically active members of the M28B family are often involved in cleavage of the N‐ or C‐terminal groups from peptides or peptide derivatives such as folic acid. The counterpart for the predicted catalytic residue was observed in the nicastrin sequence, but only one of the five known Zn‐chelating residues in M28B peptidases could be unambiguously pinpointed in nicastrin, yielding a hypothesis that the latter is more likely to be catalytically inactive.21

Comparative Sequence Analysis of Presenilin: Putative New Domain
Explosive growth of sequence databases in the last decade is now complemented by many nonredundant methods of sequence analysis. Inferences about structural and functional properties of proteins are more reliable when based on several methods, and when comparative approach is used to extract information from all available, evolutionarily diverse homologs.22-24

Search of sequence databases with the PSI‐BLAST program25 indicate that presenilins are related to the membrane protein family known as CD47 leukocyte surface antigens, or integrin‐associated proteins. The CD47 antigens contain the extracellular, immunoglobulin‐like domain in the N‐terminal region and the second domain with five transmembrane regions occupying the C‐terminal two thirds of the protein. When the latter domain (amino acids 122–323 of human CD47; gi 1171879) was used as a query in the database scan, the PS1 sequence from Xenopus (gi 6093849) was detected with the probability of chance matching E = 3 × 10−4 before any iterations. When amino acids 1–207 of the latter sequence were used as a query, human CD47 isoforms (gi 478105 and gi 477855) were detected with E‐values of 2 × 10−5. Given the biased sequence composition of both proteins, this is an example of similarity to be treated with caution,26 but it is further corroborated with the fact that the region of conservation between presenilins and CD47 spans four TM segments, essentially with no gaps, and shares predicted TM topology (Fig. 1). Poxviruses encode a family of closely related proteins, with probability of matching by chance between human CD47 and variola virus A38 (gi 465045) of 4 × 10−11.

CD47 proteins are involved in a variety of molecular interactions, participating in cellular responses such as recognition of self,27 motility,28 synaptic transmission,29 interleukin production,30-32 and apoptosis.33, 34 Most of these interactions are attributed to the extracellular domain (e.g., see 35, and no specific function has been assigned for the transmembrane segments of CD47. The similarity reported here may indicate that “TM 2–5” domain enables communication between cytosol and the extramembranous space (the extracellular milieu in the case of CD47 and lumen of the ER in the case of presenilins), linking the predicted catalytic and signaling roles of presenilin.36

The alignment of the most conserved region in presenilins and CD47 proteins, an extracellular loop flanked by segments IV and V in presenilins, is shown in Figure 2. I derived a regular expression by using the notation from the SEALS package (Ref. 37 and http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih. gov/CBBresearch/Walker/SEALS/info/manpages/grefre.html). Despite the lack of completely conserved residues in the alignment, the broad pattern “_oil_oil_oil_oil[VNQG]_ oil[GSC]%7[PHF]%2[GS][PSH]%4[GQ]%2_oil_oil”, where _oil stands for hydrophobic amino acids (V, I, L, M, F, Y, W, C, and A), identified all animal proteins in the data set, with only one false positive (sugar permease from Mycoplasma, gi 13507999). The failure of this search to detect CD47‐like sequences from poxviruses and plant presenilins is due to the one‐residue inserts in both these subsets of sequences and to a much lower degree of overall conservation between plant and animal presenilins in the N‐terminal regions corresponding to TM segments I–V. In contrast, plant and animal presenilins are highly similar in the C‐terminal halves, starting from the TM segment VI. Thus, N‐terminal regions of presenilins may be functionally distinct from their C‐terminal protease domains, and CD47 proteins in animals may have evolved from the N‐termini of presenilin‐like molecules after the split between plants and animals.

It is interest that the transmembrane segment predictions for presenilins by three different programs confirm the intramembrane position for only one of the two conserved aspartic acid residues. The programs TMHMM, which uses explicit probabilistic modeling of TM segments,38 ALOM2, which relies on hydrophobicity indices,39 and PHD, which is based on the machine learning approach40 and reaches 86% accuracy,41, 42 unanimously place the first aspartate (D257 in human presenilin‐1) inside the TM 6. The second aspartate (D385), however, is inevitably found in the extracellular loop, with the TM 7 predicted to start between positions 408 and 411 [illustrated in Fig. 1(A)]. Only TMHMM prediction suggests a possible additional TM segment between amino acids 380–400, albeit with extremely low probability (<0.1 compared to the probabilities of ≥0.95 for the rest of the TM segments). Thus, although both aspartates are conserved in all presenilins, including the plant homologs, and although the mutational analysis of D385 in mammalian proteins indicates its importance for γ‐secretase activity, the actual mechanism and the subcellular site of γ‐secretase‐mediated cleavages require further investigation.

Nicastrin May Be an Active Peptidase
Iterative database search with the nicastrin sequence detected orthologous proteins in multicellular eukaryotes, as well as statistically significant similarity of this family to a group of zinc‐dependent hydrolases, which includes peptidases of the M28B family and endoglucanases. Fagan et al.21 were the first to report this relationship. Our search started with the whole sequence of human nicastrin, and the default cutoff of 0.002 was set to select homologous sequences for profile construction. At the fourth iteration, human N‐acetylated α‐linked acidic dipeptidase, the enzyme with demonstrated biochemical activity, passed the cutoff with the probability of chance match p = 2 × 10−9, strongly suggesting an evolutionary relationship. Many other peptidases/deacetylases from diverse species were observed at this and following iterations. Fagan et al. explored functional relevance of these observations by aligning two nicastrin homologs with the two related sequences with known three‐dimensional structures, human transferrin receptor and aminopeptidase from Streptromyces. The three‐dimensional structures of these domains reveal a seven‐ or eight‐stranded β‐sheet flanked by several alpha helices.43, 44 The reaction mechanism is likely to be mediated by an acidic residue in the catalytic site, as well as by the two Zn atoms bound nearby and chelated by three acidic residues and two histidines. Conservation of only two of six crucial residues was detected by Smith‐Waterman alignment of four sequences, prompting the hypothesis that nicastrin may have lost peptidase activity in evolution and may have retained only protein‐binding capacity similar to transferrin receptor.21

In contrast to that four‐sequence alignment, comparison of a large number of diverse members of the M28B superfamily to nicastrins suggests that the latter may be catalytically active (Fig. 3). The most conserved sequence blocks were extracted by the combination of segment‐pair overlap and Gibbs sampling options of the MACAW program.45 Three of the functionally important negatively charged residues (D85, E131, and D160 in aminopeptidase 1XJO) are found within these blocks and are all conserved in nicastrin. The putative Zn‐chelating histidines (H85 and H247 in aminopeptidase) are either conserved or converted to bulky charged or polar residues (arginine, serine, asparagine, or glutamine) in nicastrin sequences. In transferrin receptor, there are three replacements of critical residues, two of them by glycine. These two changes appear to be responsible for the lack of enzymatic activity in transferrin receptor. Indeed, glycine is futile as a replacement of catalytic nucleophile glutamate, and there are virtually no examples of glycine playing active metal‐chelating role in the enzymatic centers. In contrast, all four amino acids replacing histidines in nicastrin are listed in Bioinorganic Motifs Database46 as chelators of Zn or other divalent cations in metal‐dependent hydrolases.

Thus, multiple alignment provides a much sharper picture of sequence conservation between nicastrins and M28B‐like hydrolases, as well as stronger structure‐function implications, than a locally optimal alignment of a small number of sequences.21 It should be also noted that the sequence of the main domain is permuted in some M28B‐like proteins, with either N‐terminal or C‐terminal regions contributing structural elements to the core; this may result in a few conserved sequence motifs left behind by both Fagan et al. and myself. The domain architecture of nicastrin and other M28B‐like proteins is illustrated in Figure 4.

If nicastrin is an active protease, it may be involved in maturation of the other components of secretasome, or of some of its substrates. As a matter of speculation, one can even submit that the additional peptidase activity acts synergistically with the presenilin‐mediated cleavage, helping to convert potentially disease‐associated Aβ42 into Aβ40. Indeed, cleavage of A4CT after amino acid 42 in the middle of the TM segment would decrease the attachment of amyloid β to the membrane and make the peptide more accessible to the action of a hydrophilic but membrane‐anchored nicastrin.


