The putative movement domain encoded by nepovirus RNA-2 is conserved in all sequenced nepoviruses 

Nepoviruses are isometric, two-component, positive-strand plant RNA viruses
which belong to the lineage of picorna-like viruses [5, 10]. Each of the two
genomic RNAs of nepoviruses codes for a single polyprotein that is processed
upon infection by the protease encoded by RNA-1 [8, 12]. The virus genome
is presumably replicated by RNA polymerase and RNA helicase provided by
RNA-1 [10]. The C-terminal domain of the RNA-2 polyprotein encodes the
capsid protein (Mr ca. 55 kDa); the rest of the polyprotein differs in size in
different nepoviruses [8] and its function is unknown.
By analogy with related comoviruses, it has been proposed that a portion
of the RNA-2 polyprotein adjacent to the capsid protein controls virus cell-tocell movement [6]. In cowpea mosaic comovirus, the corresponding domain
(58/48 kDa protein) is essential for cell-to-cell movement [19] and also for
assembly of tubular structures in vivo that are believed to be the routes for virus
trafficking from cell to celt [18]. Similar tubules have been observed in plants
infected by tomato ringspot nepovirus (TomRSV; [20]). Antibodies raised
against a TomRSV-encoded peptide adjacent to coat protein cistron have
revealed that this virus-specific epitope was present an the surface of the tubules,
similarly to comovirus movement protein [20].
Despite overall close relatedness of comovirus and nepovirus groups, the
putative movement domains of the two groups are poorly conserved. It has
been shown [9, 13] that comovirus movement domains are related to movement
proteins of caulimoviruses and putative movement proteins of capilloviruses;
in contrast, putative movement domains of tobacco black ring nepovirus 
(TBRV) and Hungarian grapevine chrome mosaic nepovirus (GCMV) were
distantly related to caulimovirus movement proteins, but could not be directly
aligned to comovirus 58 kDa/48 kDa proteins [9].
Sequences of four other nepovirus RNA-2 have been reported. In TomRSV,
a segment of RNA-2 encoded polyprotein corresponding to the 48 kDa in vivo
product [20] has been aligned to the similarly located sequence encoded by
grapevine fanleaf virus (GFLV) [15], but similarity to TBRV or GCMV proteins
has not been found. The putative movement domain in GFLV has been proposed to resemble TBRV and GCMV sequences mainly at the level of protein
secondary structure [17]. The sequence of raspberry ringspot virus (RRV) has
been proposed to resemble TBRV and GCMV sequences, but not TomRSV
or GFLV sequences I-2]; actual alignment has not been shown in that study. 
Finally, the sequence of substantial part of arabis mosaic (ArMV) RNA-2
polyprotein has been reported but not analyzed [1].
To investigate the relationship between non-structural domains encoded by
nepovirus RNA-2, we first performed pairwise comparisons using the ALIGN-2
program [11]; this program automatically delineates segments with the lowest
probability of the chance occurrence of the observed similarity. Only segments
adjacent to coat protein cistrons were significantly similar. After delineating
these similar segments, we employed a progressive alignment strategy [4] to
create a multiple alignment of nepovirus putative movement domains, first
aligning the most similar sequences and then incorporating more distant ones.
Closely related TBRV and GCMV sequences were aligned first; then a very
similar RRV sequence was added. Related CFLV and ArMV sequences were
aligned separately, and similar segment of TomRSV was added to this alignment.
The two alignments were then aligned to each other. The adjusted alignment
score that is calculated by OPTAL is expressed as the number of standard
deviations (SD) by which the observed score exceeds an average of 25 independent simulations of the alignment procedure with scrambled sequences; the
adjusted scores above 6-7 SD are generally considered to be indicative of
genuine relationship [3, 4, 7]. The alignment of six nepovirus movement
domains (Fig. 1) is characterized by a reliable score of 7.4 SD, although the
number of invariant residues is not high. 
In our previous work, we have identified several highly conserved residues
in the putative movement proteins from many virus groups [9, 13]. A proline
residue in hydrophobic surrounding has been delineated in caulimovirus, comovirus and capillovirus movement proteins and TBRV and GCMV sequences.
This motif is conserved in all nepovirus sequences known so far ("P" motif,
Fig. 1). On the other hand, the "30kDa" motif identified by us in movement
proteins from 17 virus groups [13], which consists of a putative hydrophobic
helix terminated by a highly conserved aspartic acid residue, was not found in
the alignment of nepovirus proteins. Thus, the relationship of nepovirus putative
movement domains to the "30kDa superfamily" of plant virus movement
proteins is uncertain. However, the movement domain in TomRSV is associated
with tubular structures in vivo [20], similarly to movement proteins of comoviruses [19] and caulimoviruses [14] which may imply functional similarity.
Noteworthy in particular is that the "P" motif has been also shared by caulimovirus movement proteins with remotely related cellular chaperones from the
90 K heat shock protein family [9]. In a broad analogy with the chaperone
function, the aligned domain in the nepovirus RNA-2 movement protein,
including the "P" motif, might be involved in assembly or turnover of
virus-induced tubular structures that enable virus cell-to-cell movement. It is
hoped that alignment presented here will be helpful as a guide for site-directed
mutagenesis and for design of diagnostic probes aimed at better understanding
of nepovirus cell-to-cell movement. 
