Using an extension of his Bayesian classification algorithm, the author identifies and describes residues that differ among various GTPase families with particular focus on Arf and Arl-like GTPases. The analysis and method strongly depend on prior subfamily knowledge and alignment of pre-classified seed families which would make the same approach less easily applicable to other families, at least in an unsupervised manner.
The seed dependency is not a major problem for this manuscript since the selection of pre-classified GTPase subfamilies is in good agreement with the literature in this field but simplifies the evolutionary scenario for some of the subfamilies, e.g. Galpha proteins, which could be further split into smaller families as was done for the different Arf/Arls. Maybe the difficulties reported when comparing Gα to Arf/Arls could be overcome with more attention given to detailed pairwise subfamily similarities/differences. In general, it would be interesting if the seed grouping and group relations could be automatically derived and weighted, for example from phylogenetic trees. If the author prefers probabilistic sampling, BEAST, would be an option to fit into the Bayesian framework.
The input alignment used cuts out both N- and C-termini of the proteins which may have appeared messy in the large alignment due to strongly differing terminal extension lengths. However, besides having different lengths of linker regions, these termini are actually also characteristic for subfamilies. For example, several of the Arf/Arl subfamilies are either N-terminally myristoylated or acetylated which dramatically alters their cellular context and function. Similarly, some but not all Galpha subfamilies are also myristoylated, while Ras, Ran, Rho, Rab etc. have different subfamily-specific patterns of farnesylation or geranylgeranylation. A possible solution to the problem of aligning termini to be included in this analysis would be to assume that the respective motifs for posttranslational modifications are recognized as extended peptides followed by some linkers of varying length. The terminal portions of the alignment could, therefore, simply be assumed to be gapless while the linkers of varying lengths between the termini and the globular structure (current alignment) can be more or less ignored.
The Bayesian classification method used is not well described but builds mainly upon previous publications. For easier understandability, a few sentences could be added to give a bit more detail, especially on how conservation was initially derived/defined. For example, the manuscript mentions the importance of detecting positions fully conserved in the foreground but not conserved in the background set. However, subfamily-specific positions that are different between families may still be conserved within their respective subfamilies which makes them even more interesting for functional specificity but they will be different in terms of probabilities for drawing the same distribution by chance compared to random background sequences (e.g. one position with "all Lysine in Arf1 but all Glutamate in Arf2" would be different from "all Lysine in Arf1 and no conservation at all in Arf2").
The fact that the most common consensus background residue in Figure ​Figure3A3A is leucine which is also one of the most common residues in databases would indicate that this background set approaches database composition for the most general comparisons while this is not the case for all other examples.
The lack of displaying representatives from the other subfamilies in the output alignment makes it difficult to verify the predicted status of subfamily-specific conservation. Since the seed alignment is curated and consists of only few members, it should be suitable to be displayed in the output as well as the main manuscript as figures including the annotation for positions with explicitly discussed subfamily-specific conservation. For example, the program Jalview allows conservation coloring based on group selections to highlight subfamily differences.
While the structural part of the manuscript focuses on intra-molecular interpretation of the importance of the identified residues, the complexity of regulation through protein-protein interactions of various GTPases by other proteins is only marginally mentioned although it should play a major role in determining subfamily-specificities.
The argumentation of functional roles of residues based on existence of hydrogen bonds to known important residues is qualitatively interesting but several more residues in the vicinity that were not highlighted in the manuscript may fulfill the same criteria which raises the question if such arguments are truly specific. At the same time, the author goes into great detail to highlight the agreement with previous biochemical and structural studies which make this part of the description of the used dataset valuable as benchmark for comparison with other methods.
Identification of subfamily-specific residues has been attempted multiple times by several different groups before and the manuscript would greatly benefit from mentioning different existing approaches. The list of references appended at the bottom of this referee report shows the broad spectrum of available methods and could be useful to any interested reader. To check robustness of the presented results over different methods or otherwise to highlight possible advantages of his approach, it would be good to apply 1 or 2 of the more successful alternative methods to the same dataset. It may be of interest to compare to results from methods that do not require a priori classified examples but rather calculate initial groupings from a phylogenetic tree to showcase advantages and disadvantages of different approaches on the GTPase dataset. Also, the question whether the enormous amount of aligned sequences is necessary to arrive at similar conclusions with methods that do not depend on large sample sizes could be addressed. Many of the observations may already be visible even in the seed alignment.
Overall, despite the above mentioned shortcomings that could be addressed in a revision, this manuscript provides a detailed view of functionally divergent residues in Arf/Arl GTPases and may become a good starting point for further studies, both in terms of the biology of GTPases as well as for improvement of computational methods to identify such residues.