In this paper, Dapeng Zhang et. al. attempt to decipher the molecular function of the germ plasm-specific protein, Maelstrom (MAEL) which has been implicated in the piRNA pathway and also in chromatin remodeling from previous experimental studies. The authors conjectured that Maelstrom has nuclease-like activity from three main findings: Firstly, the novel MAEL-specific domain is defined by a set similar sequence segments (related via a few PSI-BLAST searches) with a conserved motif involving residues (Glu-His-His-Cys-His-Cys) from mostly metazoans (except of fish species) and some protists. Some of these protist MAEL sequences also contain the DnaQ-H specific site (Asp-Glu-Asp-His-Asp) that exhibits a 3–5' exonuclease catalytic activity. Therefore, it seems likely that the metazoan MAEL proteins had inherited nuclease-like activity from their protist MAEL ancestors. Secondly, domain architecture analysis of MAEL-related proteins showed the association of the MAEL domain with the HMG (SMART: SM00398), DUF1777 (PFAM: PF08648) and HDAC_interact (SMART: SM00761) for DNA binding, RNA binding and chromatin remodeling respectively. Finally, structural modeling showed that the MAEL-specific domain (Glu-His-His-Cys-His-Cys) in metazoan is able to form a structural core despite the lack of the DnaQ-H active residues. The authors also argued that the residues His, Cys and Glu are the most frequently residues capable of interacting with Zn2+ and also utilized by ColE7 endonuclease, Zinc transport protein ZnuA and Aldolase; analogous to metal ion-binding DnaQ-H.

There are several critical points with this manuscript:

(1) The sequence segment family collection of homologous Maelstrom protein sequences is incomplete. Using the fan-like search methodology as described in Schneider et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2006 v.7, 164), more MAEL-like sequences including sequences from Danio Rerio (e.g. A2CF13_DANRE, EXOD1_DANRE,EXOD1_DANRE/Q502M8), oxidoreductases, DNA polymerases III and 3–5' exonucleases (e.g. Q503G0_DANRE, THEX1_HUMAN;1W0H:A) from numerous species can be found. Thus, there are homologs among fish species.

The emphasis on a set of conserved positions (yet without a clear functional role) does not make the definition of a domain. Most importantly, the notion of globular domains unifies protein sequence segments having similarity of their fold (and, as a consequence, in their hydrophobic pattern). Besides understanding the types of protein families that are in the vicinity of the starting sequence, the purpose of performing fan-like search is also to determine if the search space of the starting sequence for its orthologous sequences is well sampled. When sequences are been collected, the relationship of orthology or paralogy is not obvious. But eventually, with sufficient sequence collection, sequences from different taxonomic groups will be able to form distinct group of protein families. Finally, with reference to these neighboring protein families, one can then use clustering or phylogenetic methods to determine the orthology coverage of the starting sequence. This has not been done in the work of the authors. We have carried out a full sequence family collection with a fan-like PSI-BLAST search (inclusion value for score matrix of ≤ 0.001; e-value for PSI-blast initialization < 0.06), aligned the family and created a phylogenetic tree from hits (with the group of exonucleases represented by the structure 1Y97 as outgroup, see attachment). It looks as if the so-called maelstrom group is surrounded by the bloom syndrome proteins (DNA helicases), DEAD-domain containing RNA helicases followed by bacterial nucleases as next hits. The fish sequences mentioned by us are in the neighboring helicase groups and, apparently, are not nucleases.

(2) An exhaustive search for homologous sequences across all species is the foremost important task in function annotation transfer via homology. This exhaustive list of the homologous sequences enables one to construct clusters of orthologous and paralogous genes and to group them in a phylogenetic tree. Among orthologous sequences, function annotation transfer is able to hold well especially for one-to-one orthologs, with decreased confidence at greater evolutionary distances. On the opposite end, paralogous sequences are generalized to be functional diversified and specialized. This makes the task of function annotation transfer more complex (see Koonin, 2005, Annu. Rev. Genet., 39, 309–338). In this paper, the exact homology relationships among the collected sequences were not well established and, thus, function annotation transfer in this context is problematic. It appears to us that the exonucleases are in another branch of the tree compared with maelstrom sequences; thus, the predicted function might not be correct.
We think that the conclusion about the functional relationship to the DnaQ-H domain is premature in this form. A hit with 3D-jury is, at best indicative. Our family search and the resulting phylogenetic tree (see attachment) bring the maelstrom group equally close to various helicases and nucleases. This more stringent homology search results (inclusion value for score matrix of ≤ 0.001; e-value for PSI-blast initialization < 0.06) revealed that the Maelstrom sequences are in close vicinity to a group of Bloom syndrome proteins (belonging to the DNA helicase family), bacteria nucleases and helicases while the exonucleases were not significant enough to be found (consistent with authors' PSI-blast results of insignificant p-value for the exonucleases). A preliminary phylogenetic study (with exonuclease as the out-group) showed that the Maelstrom sequences are most homologous to the Bloom syndrome protein sequences in comparison to the other sequences. DnaQ-H is by far not the closest functionally characterized neighbors. In the absence of further structural and catalytic information of the MAEL motif (Glu-His-His-Cys-His-Cys), the functional evolution relationship between Maelstrom and exonuclease is still unclear except for a potential similarity of fold.

If you do not have an own resource for correct family collection, we strongly suggest the authors to use protein family searcher like HHsenser http://toolkit.tuebingen.mpg.de/hhsenser to collect more homologous sequences to clarify the relationship of Maelstrom to its adjacent protein families.
(3) Furthermore, the suggestion of nuclease-like activity in metazoan MAEL proteins is weak given that the DnaQ-H active residues were not conserved even if the predicted tertiary structure is correct and, probably, conserved in the family. A structural is only a plausibility argument; it does not prove the conclusion. Doubts are the more appropriate since the homology model involves a translocation/shifting of the active site.

At the end, a set of sequentially similar sequence segments without any trustworthy molecular function prediction remains. This result is not necessarily demanding another publication.

Firstly, the authors utilized the 3D-jury results to indicate that the maelstrom protein segment might confer a similar fold to that of DnaQ-H domain exemplified by pdb 1W0H:A. It appears to us that the evolutionary distance to these exonucleases is considerable and that other groups are much more closely related. We found the Maelstrom sequences to be most homologous to the Bloom syndrome protein sequences. Therefore, the structural fold prediction might not be reliable and, at such evolutionary distances, it would be not surprising if the relative positions of important residues are scrambled. Furthermore, the metazoan Maelstrom proteins have lost these residues that appear indispensable for the nuclease activity. Unless it can proven experimentally, the suggestion that metazoan Maelstroms have nuclease activity seems less plausible, especially given the presence of a more closely related group of Bloom syndrome proteins.

Secondly, Anantharaman et al. state that the presence of a characteristic set of conserved active residues is important for the identification of enzymes in sequence analysis. The set of conserved active residues are typically derived from known set of sequences and structures of related enzymes. For those proteins with preserved structure but varying catalytic residues, the detection of evolutionary relationship is far more difficult. In the case of the Maelstrom, the structure is purely hypothetical and the MAEL motif (Glu-His-His-Cys-His-Cys) has yet to show nuclease-like activity. Therefore, to say that a translocation or shifting of the active nucleatic site has occurred in the Maelstrom in the course of its evolution simply cannot be proven at this point without further experimentation or other type of compelling information. Thus, the molecular function of the maelstrom domain remains unclear and the current stage of research does not justify a report; otherwise, any additional branch of the phylogenetic tree would deserve another article.