The question on how to determine the occurrence of regulatory elements in nucleic acid sequences is in the center of biomolecular sequence analysis since many decades. The literature has become large, it is not easy to oversee and to evaluate. Thus, a review in this area is appropriate.

The present revised MS of Sandve and Drablos has an acceptable style and language, the article is well structured and easy to read.

The authors wish to present their quite formalized, integrated framework (level 1 – small motif binding sites, level 2 – clusters of sites in close proximity (= modules), level 3 – combinations of modules in the regulatory region of a gene, level 4 – sets of modules in regulatory regions of sets of genes) for organizing the vast literature and for delineating the elementary recognition tasks in the prediction of regulatory elements.

From the very beginning (last paragraph in the introduction), the authors refrain from a comparison of various methods with respect to their performance. Moreover, there is no quantitative assessment in the manuscript that allows to estimate what can be expected from the group of methods described in this review in general. It is the pity reality that prediction of regulatory regions is pretty unreliable with both false-positive and false-negative prediction rivalling the number of true predictions.

The following manuscript text is merely a compilation of the variations in mathematical formulations used in the different methods in the literature. For assessing the relative merit of the various approaches, the authors do not have appropriate criteria. Although a performance comparison is difficult and gold standard test sets are not readily available, it would nevertheless give some hint on the reliability of methods and their relative accuracy. The comparative work of Bajic VB, Tan SL, Suzuki Y, Sugano S. (Promoter prediction analysis on the whole human genome. Nat Biotechnol. 2004 Nov;22(11):1467–73) is focused on a very specifc type of a regulatory region but it is at least a beginning of a large-scale performance evaluation. If the authors do not wish to get involved in such a comparative study, they should at least provide a review of published data. To a certain extent, this has been provided in an additional section in the revised version but the wording appears very polite and a quantification of performance is not provided. To emphasize the view of a practitioner, this is what matters.
It would be another way to assess methods by their implementation of true biological mechanisms into their formal approaches. I wonder that biological literature on transcription regulation is not considered in this review. A comprehensive survey is not indicated for this review. But for the purpose of gussing future ways out of the difficulties, one might analyze the experimental data available for a few well-studied transcription complexes and genes regulated by them. Even if a method yet fails to perform in a large-scale test, it might be a good start for further development if its mathematical/analytical formulations captures major mechanistic aspects of the biological process of recognizing regulatory sequences. Another mathematical reformulation of existing approaches will certainly not change the status of the field.
The increasing availability of data from high-throuput methodologies (e.g., microarray (ChIP) data) for certain DNA-binding protein complexes will possibly change the situation for developing prediction tools in the near future.

In its present form, the review can be useful for people in the field since some part of the vast literature is organized in a reasonable way. At the same time, the review does not give guidance to the reader, which lines of prediction tool development are most promising and what conditions must be fulfilled to move the field out of its apparent stagnation.