Early evolution without a tree of life

Abstract
Life is a chemical reaction. Three major transitions in early evolution are considered without recourse to a tree of life. The origin of prokaryotes required a steady supply of energy and electrons, probably in the form of molecular hydrogen stemming from serpentinization. Microbial genome evolution is not a treelike process because of lateral gene transfer and the endosymbiotic origins of organelles. The lack of true intermediates in the prokaryote-to-eukaryote transition has a bioenergetic cause.

Introduction
Biology currently lacks a robust and comprehensive description of early evolution. We should aim to fill that void, but in a language that operates with biology and chemistry, not with branching patterns in phylogenetic trees, versions of which based on informational genes are called the tree of life. Genomes attest unequivocally to the abundance of lateral gene transfer in microbial chromosome history, but current thinking on early evolution is still largely couched in the conceptual framework of trees. When it comes to getting a fuller grasp of microbial evolution, trees might be standing in the way more than they are actually helping us at the moment, because i) the overall relatedness of prokaryotic genomes is not properly described by any single tree, and ii) the relationship of eukaryotes to prokaryotes is also not tree-like in nature because the endosymbiotic origins of organelles introduces lineage mergers and genetic amalgamation into the evolutionary process. If we aim to deliver to science and society a complete picture of early evolution, then at some point we have to incorporate the origin of life into the larger picture of things, too, which means linking microbial evolution to the elements on early Earth. Overall those are fairly tall orders, but we have to start somewhere.

Getting a better picture of early evolution is important for understanding our place in the larger scheme of things. Yet the further back we look in time, the less we know about the course of life's history. The evolutionary history of organisms visible to the naked eye -- plants and animals -- has a recurrently branching phylogeny that can be more or less accurately represented in the mathematical image of a bifurcating tree. Darwin's mechanisms of natural variation and natural selection were inferred from observations of macroscopic life, and those two mechanisms are still sufficient to explain the phylogenetic history of such organisms whose evolutionary process is fundamentally tree-like in nature. Given modern genome sequencing capabilities and computers, the goal of realizing Darwin's vision of a grand natural system for those groups of multicellular organisms for which he proposed descent with modification, is merely a matter of time and effort (and we have the fossil record as a helpful system of independent reference to boot). All we have to do is to collect enough data from genomes and refine our tree-building methods sufficiently to bring the structure of the tree of multicellular organisms into focus.

So certain is the conclusion about our ability to decipher the tree of macroscopic life that many an evolutionary biologist excitedly jumps straight to the conclusion that the concept of a grand natural system -- the unity of bifurcating phylogeny and a natural systematics of cladistic variety -- extends to all organisms and all of evolutionary history. As one phylogeneticist once optimistically put it "All the events of biological evolution are played out somewhere along the branches of phylogenetic trees" [1]. However, those of us who are trying to understand topics like early evolution, prokaryotic evolution and the prokaryote-to-eukaryote transition, know that evolution among microbial genomes -- our only source of genetic evidence (there is chemical and geochemical evidence, too) for early evolution -- has more to it than just sorting out the order of branches. The claim that all of evolution maps to a tree is not true, it only applies to organisms visible to the naked eye, like in Darwin's day. As it concerns our understanding of the evolution of microbial genomes, acceptance of such claims about universal trees upon which all of life's events can be mapped -- or worse, belief in their truth [2] -- is more likely to impair progress in understanding early evolution than to promote it (for the evolution of multicellular life, trees are fine).

Life's early history is a process of microbial evolution, where neither the evolutionary events linking the evolution of genes across prokaryotic genomes nor the processes linking prokaryotes to eukaryotes are strictly tree-like in nature [3]. In prokaryote genome evolution, lateral gene transfer (LGT) is an important mechanism of natural variation [4], while the prokaryote-to-eukaryote transition involved the wholesale merger of prokaryotic genomes via endosymbiosis [5, 6, 7]. Eukaryotes have meiosis to ensure that genes are only recombined reciprocally among individuals of the same species, prokaryotes lack both such luxurious mating mechanisms and the genetic lineage purity that they confer [8]. Prokaryotes live in a world where plasmids hop around without respect to systematic categories [9], where individual cells are outnumbered 10:1 by alien infectious agents (phage) that can enter their bodies and insert new genes [10]; they live in a world where some individuals, faced with a stressful life situation, cut up their genomes into a thousand little pieces, package the 4.5 kb genome pieces in protein and toss them into the enviroment as gene transfer agents (GTAs) "in hope" that "someone' will be able to use them [11, 12]. Fortunately, daily human experience is deviod of analogous processes: we are not constantly surrounded by ten grape-sized gene injectors that are out to convert our internal organs into intruder copies, and when we feel stressed, we do not saw off our toes and offer them to our neighbors.

When we study the long-term evolution of things like birds and bees and flowers and trees, we can confidently lean on the concept of a tree and safely assume that biological events play out along the branches of a bifurcating phylogeny (of populations). But when we study prokaryote evolution, where LGT abounds, or the prokaryote-to-eukaryote transition [13], which centrally involves the origin of mitochondria and gene transfers to the nucleus[12, 13, 14, 15], the processes at hand are not tree-like to begin with.

Taught tradition in evolutionary biology implores us to approach, understand and converse on lineage history in terms of trees. But for microbes, trees are not enough if we want to understand genome evolution [16]. Each gene in a given prokaryotic genome has its genealogical tree, yes, but the farther we go back into evolutionary history, the less congruent are the trees of different genes, and the farther we look across prokaryotic diversity, the smaller is the fraction of genes whose distribution across genomes is accounted for via vertical descent. If we want to depict the evolution of prokaryotes, trees are inadequate because they capture only a tiny amount of the underlying evolutionary dynamics. The tree of life as currently defended [17] is more about classification and the search for a tiny minority of genome data that might be treelike over some portions of history -- though is it very difficult to show that they are treelike [18] -- than it is about understanding microbial evolutionary dynamics. As some of us have said before: microbial evolution and the tree of life are two different things [8].

This realization has (or should have) two consequences. First, it puts an onus upon us to divorce the study of microbial evolution from a rigid manifesto of natural systematics, which is simple enough [3, 19]. Second, it puts an even heavier onus upon us to react in our methods of investigation of, and our conceptual approach to, microbial evolutionary processes by resorting to the use of mathematical models that are more complex than the simple bifurcating tree. Of course, it is not absolutely imperative that we react. We can, if we so choose, simply pretend that microbial evolution really is tree-like after all [2, 17] and impose the bifurcating tree on our thinking at all levels so that we can ask questions of which bifurcations fit our favorite natural categories better, without daring to ask whether the underlying process going on in nature is tree-like to begin with.

If, however, we choose to react with our repertoire of analytical methods, then the obvious solution is to pursue network-based, rather than tree-based, approaches to the study of microbial genome relatedness. In the realm of networks, we can concern ourselves with questions of how to model, in mathematical terms, the microbial evolutionary process -- for example non-directed [20, 21] vs. directed [22] networks -- but we do not need to worry immediately about the implications for systematics, which for prokaryotes or phages [23] can hardly be strictly natural anyway, because of lateral transfer. Networks do not confine our thinking to the preconcieved notion that microbial evolution corresponds solely to a process of pure clonal lineage splittings that, over time, generate the patterns of recurrently bifurcating trees.

The tree of life is only one impediment to a better understanding of early evolution
If we want a full picture of evolutionary history, we have to look all the way back to life's origin. As the major evolutionary transitions, Maynard Smith and Szathmary [24] listed: i) the origins of replicating molecules in compartments (from replicating molecules), ii) chromosomes (from independent replicators), iii) DNA and protein (from RNA), iv) eukaryotes (from prokaryotes), v) sexual populations (from asexual ones), vi) multicellular life (from protists), vii) colonies (from individuals), and viii) human societies (from primate predecessors). Half of the major transitions they identified fall in the realm of early evolution. Lane [25] lists the ten major inventions of evolution as encompassing the origins of i) life, ii) DNA, iii) photosynthesis, iv) eukaryotes, v) sex, vi) motility, vii) sight, viii) warm bloodedness, ix) consciousness and x) death. He also sees half of evolution's greatest inventions within the realm of early evolution. Koonin [26] lists the origins of i) protein folds, ii) viruses, iii) prokaryotic cells, iv) the major prokaryotic groups, v) eukaryotes and vi) animal phyla as the major evolutionary transitions, again mostly falling within the realm of early evolution. That does not necessarily mean that more interesting things happened during early evolution than later, but perhaps that we just wish that we knew as much about early evolution as we know for events later in evolution.

From my perspective, the three most important processes (only two of which are evolutionary transitions) in early evolution are i) the origin of life, ii) prokaryotic evolution, and iii) the prokaryote-to-eukaryote transition. Traditionally, those are the areas where evolutionary biology's greatest weaknesses have been when it comes to providing a fully tangible account of life's history. One might ask: Is it important for evolutionary biology to provide a better understanding of the very earliest history of life? It is arguably one of the most important frontiers facing science, specifically as evolutionary biology interfaces with society. One might also ask: Can we ever understand anything as complex as the origin of life and early evolution? The answer is unquestionably yes, the issue is merely when we will attain that understanding.

But much like pulling teeth, making progress on these issues can mean that we have to let go of one or the other of our familiar and trusted theories (or elements thereof) from time to time, which can be painful (but like a visit to the dentist, things generally feel better afterwards). The alternative needs to explain more or as much of the same observations while requiring fewer corollary assumptions (we want better teeth, not fewer). That said, three major obstacles to progress in the field of early evolution can currently be identified, views that served well in their day but that now need to go. These impediments concern three traditional and widely held -- but if we think about it in more detail, untenable -- notions about the course of early evolution that are deeply engrained in the minds of scientists and society and that we must abandon altogether if we are to make headway on these central issues. The three conceptual impediments are the notions that: i) life arose from some kind of organic soup, ii) microbial evolution has anything to do with a tree of life or otherwise has the shape of a tree, and iii) the prokayote-to-eukaryote transition occurred before the origin of mitochondria (as opposed to the more easily defendable view of its having ocurred in the wake of the origin of mitochondria).

Life is a chemical reaction, not stirred organic soup
The very familiar concept that life arose from some kind of organic soup is 80 years old [27, 28, 29] and had best be abandoned altogether. The reason is that life is not about the spatial reorganization of preexisting components, it is a continuous chemical reaction, an energy-releasing reaction, and a far-from-equilibrium process. The proposal that life arose through the self-organisation of preformed constituents in a pond or an ice-pore containing some kind of preformed prebiotic broth can be rejected with a simple thought experiment: If we were to take a living organism and homogenize it so as to destroy the cellular structure but leave the molecules intact, then put that perfect organic soup into a container and wait for any amount of time, would any form of life ever arise from it de novo? The answer is no, and the reason is because the carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and hydrogen in that soup is at equilibrium: it has virtually no redox potential to react further so as to provide electron transfers and chemical energy that are the currency and fabric of life [30, 31, 32].

If not soup, what? Life is about redox chemistry, so the site and environment of life's origin should be replete with redox reactions. Alkaline hydrothermal vents provide a good model for understanding early chemical evolution because they have some similarity to living systems themselves. Perhaps similar to some types of hydrothermal vents observable today, such as Lost City [33, 34, 35, 36], alkaline vents during the Hadean would have offered a necessary and sufficient redox potential (in the form of the H2-CO2 redox couple) and catalytic capabilities (in the form of transition metal ions) to permit organic synthesis at a specific location in space and stably over geological time to give rise to the chemical constituents of life and to foster the transition from geochemically contained chemical networks to bona fide free-living cells [30, 31, 32]. Why, exactly, are alkaline hydrothermal vents conceptually attractive in the origin of life context? There are a number of reasons, many of which are old as the discovery of vents themselves [37, 38] but they remain current [39].

One reason concerns compartmentation. Compartmentation from the environment is essential for the transition from inorganic matter to the first living systems [30, 31, 40, 41], and hydrothermal vents are replete with naturally forming microcompartments [30, 34], geochemically formed concentrating mechanisms to enable the origin of replicating systems. Let's recall that replication means doubling of mass, hence the precursors for any doubling need to be in steady supply, ideally at their site of synthesis.

A second reason concerns thermodynamics. Life cannot have emerged against the laws of thermodynamics. Excitingly, the overall reaction for the synthesis of the chemical constituents of a microbial cell is exergonic (energy-releasing) at temperatures of around 50-100°C, as recent calculations show [42] for exactly the kind of alkaline hydrothermal vent (chemically similar to Lost City) that some of us have in mind [39]. In other words, the synthesis of life's substance (protein, nucleic acids, cell wall, lipids, etc) from the concentrations of CO2, H2S, HPO42-, NH4+, H+ and electrons (H2) as would be found at the vent ocean interface of such an alkaline hydrothermal system releases energy, even without considering main energy metabolic reactions, just considering anabolic cell mass accumulation [42]. That is very important because most people assume that at life's origin one had to add a special kind of energy somehow (for example in the form of lightning), rather than harnessable chemical energy being available naturally, all the time.

In addition there is the nature and availability of that chemical energy to consider. The most obivious source of energy for early chemical and living systems, and the kind considered by Amend and McCollom [42] is molecular hydrogen, H2, steming from geochemical processes, just as are observed at Lost City today [36]. Lost City effluent contains about 10 mM H2 [36]. H2, both from geological sources [43] and from biological sources [44] is very widely used by prokaryotes as a source of electrons and energy today [45]. But H2 is so simple that it is often overlooked: a recent review of the possible sources of energy for the origin of life does not mention H2 at all [46], even though it is the most abundant source of accesible chemical energy on the early Earth [47] and arguably the far most likely source of energy for the first prokaryotic cells [32, 48]. Where does that H2 come from? It comes from a process called serpentinization [47, 48]. In submarine hydrothermal systems, seawater circulates through the cust. It is drawn into the crust by gravity through cracks in the rock to depths of ~3 km where it is heated to about 150-200°C (because the deep crust is warmer than the surface). The water undergoes a redox reaction with the vast amounts of Fe2+ in the crust. Water is reduced by Fe2+ to H2, which ultimately emerges in the hydrothermal effluent, yieding oxidized iron, Fe3+, in the form of Fe3O4 [47, 48].

Enter the ominous issue of the origin of chemiosmotic energy coupling. The process of serpentinization also makes the effluent alkaline, and Lost City effluent is about pH 10 [33, 43]. Why is that significant? Figure 1 depicts the problem. If we look around in biology very hard, and consult very knowledgeable bioenergeticists [49] to make sure, we find that there are only two ways that energy is conserved in the form of ATP among life forms that we know: chemiosmosis [50] entailing rotor-stator type ATPases and substrate level phosphorylations. That is very significant. It is also a very carefully worded sentence because a new mechanism of energy conservation has recently been discovered in strict anaerobes that does not involve the phosphoanhydride bond in ATP. It involves the synthesis of reduced ferredoxin -- an energy rich compound -- coupled to a second exergonic redox reaction. The coupling mechanism is called electron bifurcation, because electron pairs are spilt in the reaction mechanism, which entails a flavin cofactor [51, 52, 53].

The only organisms that do not use ATPases for their energy conservation are pure fermenters, who gain their energy through the disproportionation of reduced carbon compounds. But those reduced carbon compounds are made by autotrophs, either photoautotrohs or chemoautotrohs, which always -- without known exception -- use chemiosmotic coupling mechanisms. Moreover, pure fermenters are always derived from chemiosmotic ancestors. Chemiosmosis is the ancestral state of ATP-dependent energy harnessing among free-living cells [54]. Chemiosmotic energy coupling has two components. The first is a membrane-bound multisubunit rotor-stator type ATPase (called F-type in eubacteria and A-type in archaebacteria, the F- and A- types are structurally similar and related). The second is a membrane bound protein-cofactor system that performs a redox reaction of the type Dred + Aox → Dox + Ared (whereby D and A stand for electron donor and acceptor, respectively [50]) the vectorial orientation of whose components across the membrane results in cations, usually protons, being removed from the cytosol and deposited outside the cell, making the inside of the cell alkaline relative to the environment. The origin of this ancestral state of energy harnessing, as universal as the genetic code, is usually but not always [30] disregarded altogether in the early evolution literature, as Mike Russell has repeatedly pointed out. The ion-pumping machinery is extremely variable across prokaryotes, whereas the ATPase is conserved. Which came first? Today, the two components are dependent upon each other to provide a functional unit. In the early evolution of life at an alkaline hydrothermal vent, the ATPase (a protein) could have harnessed the naturally preexisting proton gradient (roughly pH 9 inside, roughly pH 6 outside [30, 32, 48]), at the vent ocean interface (Figure 2). That would directly account for the circumstance that the ATPase and the principle of harnessing ion gradients across the prokaryotic plasma membrane is universal and far more conserved than i) the components that generate the ion gradient and ii) even the chemical constituents of membranes themselves, if we consider the breadth of prokaryote diversity. One might ask how then early chemical systems conserved any chemical energy at all prior to the advent of chemiosmotic coupling (which requires genes and proteins). The suggestion is that H2-, CO2-, and methyl-dependent (perhaps methylsulfide) substrate level phosphorylations were the initial source of chemical energy, leading to acyl phosphates such as acetyl phosphate that were the first broadly available energy currency for biochemical evolution at the vent up to the level of genes and proteins [32]. Acyl phosphates still have a very broadly distributed and central role in prokaryotic energy metablic processes today [55].

The abiotic (geochemical) synthesis of simple organic compounds at Lost City today provides exciting clues as to what kinds of chemistry the early Earth might have had in store. Lost City effluent contains about 1 mM methane with an isotope signature that indicates an abiotic origin, probably through reduction of dissolved CO2 via serpentinizarion [36]. Although a minor component of the methane might be of biological origin, the vast majority is of geochemical origin [56]. Short alkanes, up to pentane, of abiotic origin are also detected, as is (significantly) formate (about 0.1 mM) [57]. This indicates that geochemical processes can indeed produce compounds relevant for biochemistry, very much in line with predictions of the view that life arose in such environments. The smaller amounts of acetate in Lost City effluent (about 0.01 mM) appear at present to be of biological origin [57]. One might like to see evidence for the abiotic synthesis of more complex organic compounds in Lost City efluent, but one needs to recall that the subsurface biosphere is a vast [58] and hungry community, and if anything organic of much direct microbial use is synthesized geochemically, the chances are good that it will be consumed before the effluent reaches the surface. That circumstance (the prokaryotic colonization of the deep subsurface) is perhaps the biggest difference (apart from abundant O2, sparse CO2 and lacking Fe2+ in modern ocean water) between chemistry at a Lost City type vent today and what might have been going on in a similar system during the Hadean.

The kinds of microbes inhabiting Lost City are mainly methanogens (and anaerobic methane oxidizing forms thereof) [43]; one can only speculate about the possibility of more deeply inhabiting acetogens, based on effluent acetate concentrations [57], and recalling that Lost City effluent is rich in H2 but devoid of detectable CO2 [43, 57]. Methanogens and acetogens generate their ATP chemiosmotically during the process of synthesizing reduced organic compounds for biosynthesis [59, 60]. Chemically they have more in common than their genes might suggest [32]. Significantly in my view, both acetogens and methanogens are known that lack cytochromes, and these forms generate their chemiosmotic potential without the help of either quinones or methanophenazine (the functional analogue of quinones in methanogens) [59, 61]. Chemiosmotic pumping without the use of quinones or their analogue is generally rare in biology, simpler (requiring many fewer genes) than cytochrome-dependent chains, and arguably the most primitive state of proton-pumping machineries. That the corresponding ion-pumping complexes of cytochrome-lacking methanogens (a methyltransferase, the MtrA-H complex [53, 59]) and of cytochrome-lacking acetogens (a ferredoxin:NADH oxidoreductase, the Rnf complex) [61, 62] are unrelated is not surprising, as these represent, in this view, independent molecular solutions to the problem of how to generate a proton gradient (how to replace the naturally preexisting one at an alkaline vent) with a chemistry that is specified by genes.

It is also noteworthy that the methanogens (archaebacteria) and acetogens (eubacteria) share chemically related but genetically distinct versions of the acetyl-CoA pathway of CO2 fixation and the distinction of living from some of the smallest redox potentials known to fuel free-living cells [63]. The biochemistry of acetogens and methanogens appears to have enough in common with geochemistry at alkaline vents to make the case that they are homologous (related via common ancestry) [32]. Are molecular data in any way compatible with that view? Evidence, albeit based in trees, was presented by Kelley et al. [64] "for a methanogenic origin of the Archaea". For acetogens (taxonomically, clostridias and relatives, Firmicutes, or low GC Gram positive bacteria) similiar tree-based evidence for their basal position among eubacteria has been presented: "In our tree, Firmicutes are placed at the earliest division of Eubacteria with 66% BP support, and 33% of remaining BP show at least a subclade of Firmicutes at the earliest division" [2]. There is no reason to get too excited about that, because the results are based in trees, but it is worth noting that the results come out this way. Genomes from Clostridia (and Thermotoga) lineages also draw attention to the origin of their ancient traits [65], though not in the context discused here.

The view that the acetyl-CoA pathway is the ancestral state of microbial carbon and energy metabolism suggested an important role for chemically accessible methyl groups, for example methyl sulfide, at the orgin of biochemistry [32]. It has since become apparent that methyl sulfide is an important intermediate in modern microbial interactions involving methanogens [66]. The harnessing of a prexisting proton gradient at the vent ocean interface clearly suggests that protons were the ancestral substrates of ATPases. Mulkidjanian and colleages [67] examined ATPase sequences and came to the conclusion that sodium might be the ancestral substrate, but they also noted that their conclusion is contingent on the premise that the same set of ligands conferring Na+ specifiity over H+ specificity did not arise through convergent evolution. It turns out that "the same set of ligands" boils down to two amino acid substitutions in the membrane portion of the enzyme [67], whereby the convergent emergence of two amino acid substitutions is a commonplace observation even during human mitochondrial DNA evolution [68], so the view that protons were the ancestral substrate of ATPases is compatible with available data. Like the acetyl-CoA pathway, the newly discovered mechanism of energy conservation entailing electron bifurcation and cytoplasmic ferredoxin pools, which is arguably ancient [51], is found in both clostridias [52] and methanogens [53], compatible with the premisses set forth above.

At depth, the tree of life is not a tree
The second concept about early evolution that we need to abandon is the notion that the overall course of prokaryotic evolution can be accurately described using the mathematical model of a bifurcating tree as a model for the evolution of chromosomes. This point, namely that prokaryotic evolution is not a tree, has been argued often enough in these pages [8] and elsewhere [69]. The nature of the main arguments has not changed much in the meantime. Prokaryote evolution is not treelike because lateral gene transfer (LGT) is a real and prevalent mechanism of natural variation among prokaryotes [3]. Genomes sequences have revealed that over evolutionary time, prokaryotic genomes undergo LGT, the known mechanisms of which entail acquisition through conjugation, transduction, transformation, and gene transfer agents in addition to gene loss [70, 71, 72]. This leads to different histories for individual genes within a given prokaryotic genome and networks of gene sharing across chromosomes among both closely and distantly related lineages. In genome comparisons, LGT is traditionally characterized in terms of conflicting gene trees [73, 74] or aberrant patterns of nucleotide composition [75]. But in the larger picture of genome evolution, a tree can account for only about 1% of prokaryotic evolutionary history at best [18, 76].

If not a tree, what then? Networks should, in principle, be able to more fully uncover the dynamics of prokaryotic chromosome evolution. Networks are currently used to model various aspects of biological systems such as gene regulation [77], metabolic pathways [78], protein interactions [79], conflicting phylogenetic signals [80, 81], and ecological interactions [82]. Although it is obvious that a network analysis of gene distributions across prokaryotic genomes should provide a more realistic view of microbial evolution, one that incorporates the contribution of LGT into the process, if we look to the literature, the field is mostly still using trees [83], although evolutionary networks are actively being used as well [9, 20, 21, 22, 23, 84, 85], opening up many new and fruitful interdisciplinary avenues of pursuit. The use of networks instead of, and in addition to, trees should lead to a change in the way that microbiologists approach the process of prokaryote genome evolution.

Biologists and philosophers recently inspected the tree of life concept, unearthing a multitude of insights and a plurality of views [86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97]. In that discourse, nobody came out in favor of the concept of a single unified bifurcating tree (and classification system) as the Rosetta stone to life's history, with most contributors pointing to the circumstance that the processes operating in early evolution are not strictly treelike, because of endosymbiosis and because of LGT, which some of us have been saying all along [98, 99]. So who, if anyone, is actually defending the tree anymore? The most stalwart defence of the tree of life in recent years came not from biologists, but from a historian [100], and it could be that the most tree-prone among microbiologists would defend the method of using trees to study microbial evolution more vociferously than they might defend any particular tree itself [17]. As leaves and branches in the tree of life come and go, new approaches to the analysis of genome data will continue to emerge, some of which will be based neither on trees nor on networks [101]. It is unlikely that we will still be reading the history of microbial evolution in 20 years time from the order of branching patterns on a tree, as some would like to do it today [2]. Over time, networks will probably come to play an increasingly important role in the study of prokaryote evolution and the prokaryote to eukaryote transition.

The place of eukaryotes in the bigger picture
Related both to the origin of life issue and the tree of life issue is the place of eukaryotes in the bigger picture of evolution. From the standpoint of the genome sequence comparisons, eukaryotes are genetic chimaeras with archaebacterial type ribosomes in the cytosol, a largely archaebacterial-type information processing machinery and eubacterial-type energy production and metabolic machinery. Lake [102] termed this general functional dichotomy, with its characteristic pattern of conserved sequence similarity, informational and operational genes. This genetic and functional chimaerism in eukaryotes is well documented [5, 6, 7, 103]. Although there are many theories for the origin of eukaryotes, each designed to account for different aspects of eukaryote biology [reviewed in [104]], only three basic theory varieties address this general pattern of sequence similarity in eukaryotic genomes.

The first is an element of the neomuran theory of eukaryote origins [105, 106] called "quantum evolution" [107], a kind of gene-class-and-lineage-specific evolutionary rate fluctuation that is assumed without logical penalties to explain any pattern of observed sequence similarity (or lack thereof). In that view, eukaryotes and archaebacteria arose from actinobacteria less than a billion years ago. Diverging from their common ancestor, the ancestral stem eukaryote became phagocytotic, while the ancestral stem archaebacterium invented things like methanogenesis and everything else that distinguishes archaebacteria from eubacteria (this imaginatively late origin of methanogenesis conflicts with copious geochemical data [32]). The genes showing strong similarity between eukaryotes and archaebacteria -- but not to eubacteria (informational genes) -- underwent a radical kind of fast and furious molecular evolution over a short period of time that created that pattern, while the genes showing strong similarity between eukaryotes and eubacteria -- but not to archaebacteria -- underwent a similarly radical kind of fast and furious evolution in the common ancestor of all archaebacteria [107]. Because the theory operates with rate fluctuations to explain molecular sequence similarites, it can hardly be tested or supported with molecular data. One might complain that genome data link neither eukaryotes nor archaebacteria to actinobacteria, even though that evolutionary transition is only supposed to have occurred 850 MY ago under the theory. However, the nature of the supposed underlying evolutionary process (quantum evolution) erases that sequence similarity trace, for which reason scientific criticism of the theory can be frustrating. As in earlier versions of the theory that derive eukaryotes from cyanobacteria [108], the origin of phagocytosis is seen as the crucial evolutionary invention en route to the eukaryotic state [106], an old idea [109] that still has distinguished supporters today [110]. The earliest-branching eukaryotes in the phagotrophic theory were once called archezoa [111], a taxonomic group that has long since disappeared from the literature, unlike the phagotrophic theory [102] that generated it. While many of the eukaryotic taxonomic groups put forth by Cavalier-Smith have proven robust, his accounts of the prokaryote to eukaryote transition have remained problematic.

In the age of genomes, even supporters of the phagotrophic theory had to account for the circumstance that eukaryotes had archaebacterial informational genes, but preferably without extensive and specific rate fluctuations of gene and protein sequence evolution of the quantum evolution type hard-wired into the theory. Hence a second and popular solution to the origin of informational and operational genes was to suppose that there was some kind of archaebacterial endosymbiont in eukaryote evolution, presumably one that gave rise to the nucleus, usually presumed to have arisen in a eubacterial host. Several variants on this theme emerged [112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118], and continue to emerge [119]. Those theories have at least three major problems in common. First, and in contrast to chloroplasts and mitochondria, the nuclear compartment is in no way homologous to a prokaryotic cell, hence the whole (100 year old) notion that the nucleus was ever an endosymbiont is tenuous to begin with [120]. As with the flagellum [121] or microbodies [122], there is no evidence or homology at all to suggest that the nucleus is descended from an symbiotic bacterium. Second, they derive a cell that has eubacterial genome and eubacterial ribosomes in the cytosol, with the informational genes locked up within the archaebacterial endosymbiont. No formulations of nucleosymbiotic origins to date, even the most recent [119], provides any sound rationale as to how we arrive at a state where the ancestral eubacterial ribosomes and genome in the cytosol are gone and the archaebacterial ribosomes are operating in the cytosol while the archaebacterial chromosomes are retained in the nucleus. Third, theories for an endosymbiotic origin of the nucleus suffer, like the phagotrophic theory, from the circumstance that they all educe, as their crucial intermediate, a eukaryote that primitively lacks mitochondria (an archezoon), thereby predicting that primitively mitochondrion-lacking groups should still be around today. Contrary to that prediction, it has turned out that all eukaryotic groups either once possessed or still possess mitochondria, either in the form of O2-respiring mitochondria, anaerobic mitochondria, hydrogen-producing mitochondria (hydrogenosomes) or highly reduced mitochondria (mitosomes) [123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129]. Nucleosymbiotic origin theories keep cropping up in new garb, probably because none of them really account for the observations and remain unconvincing, sometimes even to their proponents [119].

As the third kind of theory that can account for the informational operational classes of eukaryotic genes, some of us have suggested that the host for the origin of mitochondria was simply an archaebacterium. A couple such theories have been proposed [130, 131], one of which also directly accounted for the common ancestry of mitochondria and hydrogenosomes and explicitly predicted that all eukaryotes lacking typical mitochondria had secondarily lost them [132]. Under that view, called the hydrogen hypothesis, the host was a H2-dependent archaebacterium and the endosymbiont was a facultatively anaerobic eubacterium, the common ancestor of mitochondria and hydrogenosomes, whose ability to perform anaerobic H2-producing fermentations (in addition to respiration) provided the selective pressure initially associating the symbiont to its host. The archaebacterial nature of the eukaryotic genetic apparatus is readily explained via direct descent from the archaebacterial host, while the eubacterial nature of eukaryotic energy metabolism is directly accounted for via endosymbiotic gene transfers [133] from the genome of mitochondrial endosymbiont to the chromosomes of the host, resulting in the genetic displacement (and chimaeric nature) of many preexisting host pathways [132].

The origin of the nucleus in this mitochondrion-bearing host appears to be linked to the origin of introns and spliceosomes [134] from group II introns of mitochondrial origin that hitchhiked into the host chromosomes during the course or gene transfer. These mobile prokaryotic introns spread to many positions in the genome, and underwent the transition to spliceosomal introns at those ancient eukaryote intron positions. Because ribosomal translation is faster than spliceosomal splicing, the host would only be able to express its (many) intron-containing genes by doing away with the prokaryotic paradigm of cotranscriptional translation (Figure 3). That is, a separation of splicing from translation became imperative for survival (extinction also being an option). Accordingly only such descendants survived that were able to separate splicing from translation by exclusion of ribosomes from the space surrounding active chromatin. Separation in cells usually involves membranes, and this offers a mechanistic rationale that can readily account for the observations that the only cells that ever evolved spliceosomes (eukaryotes) also evolved a nuclear membrane (composed of eubacterial lipids) and had (group II intron containing) mitochondria as well [134]. Compatible with that view, group II introns are indeed still mobile in prokaryotes today [135] and nuclear expression of group II introns yields a splicing behaviour that is very consistent with the predictions of the model [136]. In addition, sequenced eukaryotic genomes are replete with evidence for ongoing gene transfers from organelles to the nucleus today [137, 138]. This view for the autogenous origin of the nucleus in a mitochondrion-bearing cell also directly accounts for the observation that eukaryotes have their chromosomes and splicing in the nucleus, their archaebacterial ribosomes in the cytosol and their eubacterial ribosomes in the mitochondrion.

While it is easy to conjure up scenarios for the origin of eukaryotes that are more complicated and involve more partners [112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119] than models involving an archaebacterial host, there are no simpler scenarios, and this simplicity is a virtue of the theory. The only way to invoke fewer cellular partners than an archaebacterial host and a mitochondrial endosymbiont at eukaryote origins [5, 129, 132] requires reverting to the view that mitochondria did not arise via endosymbiosis [108]. Critics sometimes complain that the eubacterial genes in eukaryotes do not all trace to α-proteobacterial homologues [114, 119], but if we incoportare LGT into the bigger picture of genome evolution then it becomes untenable to assume that the ancestor of mitochondria either i) had a pristine genome devoid of "non-α-proteobacterial" genes at the time of endosymbiosis (whatever an α-proteobacteral gene is) or ii) that its free-living descendants never underwent gene donations to, or gene acquisitions from, other prokaryote lineages. In this way, LGT among free-living prokaryotes readily accounts for the apparent eubacterial mosaicism of eukaryotic nuclear genomes via the sample of genes that eukaryotes acquired at the origin of mitochondria [12, 99].

Despite the circumstance that prokaryotes can harbour other prokaryotes as endosymbionts [25, 139] and despite evidence for multiple origins of phagocytosis in eukaryote evolution [140] some maintain the position that phagotrophy, rather than the origin of mitochondria, just absolutely has to be the first step in the prokaryote to eukaryote transition [106, 110]. Whole theories rest on the argument that the only way that a eubacterium can enter another cell to become an endosymbiont is if the host is phagotrophic, sporting staunch quotes: "Phagocytosis by a protoeukaryote host is the only viable mechanism currently available to explain the origin of the mitochondrion" [141]. If the phagotrophic argument held any strength, then the existence of bacterial endosymbionts -- in prokaryotes, above, and -- in fungi would be an impossiblity, because fungi do not phagocytose. Well, it turns out that endosymbionts in fungi are common [142] and that in fact, "Bacteria that inhabit fungi intracellularly, or endosymbiotically, have been described for more than three decades. Endosymbiotic bacterial fungal interactions are ubiquitous and have been documented from all parts of the world" [143]. So much for (the origin of) phagocytosis being required for the establishment of intracellular endosymbionts.

The extreme stance that eukaryotic cell organisation (and phagocytosis) is ancestral to that in prokaryotes in general [144], is an issue that would appear, in a tree of life mindset, to hinge on branching orders deep in the tree of life [145]. But in this paper we are addressing early evolution without a tree of life and hence wish to approach the issue in a manner that does not hinge upon branches, the abundance of endosymbionts in non-phagocytosing hosts notwithstanding.

For phagocytosis, a cell requires complex machinery of membrane traffic mechanisms: an endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi, actin/tubulin cytoskeleton, cytokinesis, vesicle fusion mechanisms, phagosome formation, exocytosis, etc. That is a considerable level of evolutionary invention, entailing the origin of ~2000 new protein-coding genes [146]. For bioenergetic reasons, the origin of that machinery and its expression as protein requires mitochondria [147]. Prokaryotes have remained prokaryotes for > 3 billion years because they lack mitochondria. The increased energy per host gene that mitochondria confer upon their host by virture of vast bioenergetic membrane surface area, and bioenergetically specialized genomes (mtDNA) to service it [13, 147, 148], was strictly required to finance, in energetic terms, the origin of eukaryotic novelties. The lack of true intermediates in the prokaryote to eukaryote transition has long been a puzzle, but now it is clear that it has a bioenergetic cause, because prokaryote genome complexity is constrained by membrane bioenergetics [147]. Mitochondria released that constraint and allowed a growth in genome size and complexity and in the number of proteins that a cell can express by four to five orders of magnitude; energy per gene is the key variable [147, 148]. Prokaryotes can readily surpass many eukaryotes in terms of cell size [149], but they cannot hold a candle to eukaryotes in terms of true cell complexity. The reason is bioenergetic and boils down to mitochondria, which are the prerequisite to the origin of cell complexity -- hence phagocytosis -- in eukaryotes [147], not vice versa. On a good day, that would to put an end to a time-consuming debate regardig the nature of the host that acquired the mitochondrion: prokaryote or phagotroph, the recent history of which was readably summarized by O'Malley [150].

And what about oxygen in eukaryote evolution? Mitochondria afford eukaryotes 10,000 to 100,000 more energy per gene [147], while oxygen affords only a factor of 10-20 [147]. Nonetheless people still seem to think that the advent of oxygen was a decisive event in eukaryote evolution. We all know that O2 levels limited animal (but not plant) body size during evolution [151, 152]. Under the view of oxygen in Earth history that was current in the 1980s, the rise of atmospheric O2 some 2.3 Ga ago was thought to coincide with, and to have provided causal impetus to, the origin of eukaryotes and mitochondria [153]. But since the mid-1990's, a fundamentally different view of Proterozoic ocean chemistry has emerged from isotope geochemistry. In the new and current model of Proterozoic ocean chemistry, the O2 that started accumulating in the atmosphere ~2.3 billion years ago began oxidizing continental sulfide deposits via weathering [154], carrying very substantial amounts of sulfate into the oceans, and providing the substrate required for sulfate reducing prokaryotes, hence fueling marine biological sulfate reduction (BSR). Marine BSR became a globally significant process, as evidenced by the sedimentary sulfur isotope record [155]. Marine BSR produces marine sulfide -- H2S -- and lots of it. The presence of that sulfide means that the oceans were not only sulfidic during that time, they were also anoxic, both for chemical reasons and because sulfate reducers are strict anaerobes. Although the photic zone (the upper 200 meters or so) was producing oxygen during that time, in the lower photic zone and below, the oceans were anoxic and sulfidic [156]. Importantly, that anoxic and sulfidic condition persisted until ~580 MY ago, the same time when the first animal macrofossils appear in the geological record, with oxygenation of the oceans allowing preexisting and diversified animal lineages to increase in size [157, 158].

As such, eukaryotes, which arose some 1.5 Ga ago [159], diversified into their major lineages during anoxic and sulfidic times. It should therefore hardly be surprising (one would think) that diverse eukaryotic lineages have retained oxygen-independent forms of mitochondrial ATP synthesis from their facultatively anaerobic common ancestor [127, 128, 129, 160, 161, 162] or that mitochondrial sulfide utilization is widespread among eukaryotic lineages [163, 164]. But the notion that the ability to survive in low oxygen conditions represents a novel and recent evolutionary achievement of eukaryotes, rather than an ancient trait, remains popular with some specialists, and lateral gene transfer from one eukaryote lineage to another is suggested as the mechanism underlying its apparently sparse distribution among modern lineages [165]. What is disturbing is that exactly the same kinds of phyletic patterns (patchy distributions among eukaryote lineages) are usually interpreted not as LGT but, far more reasonably, as evidence for differential loss when it comes to structural proteins [166]. At some point even the staunchest critics of the view that the presence of anaerobic energy metabolism in eukaryotes is ancestral will have to admit that anaerobiosis is not an evolutionary achievement of eukaryotes: it is an ecological specialization. One thinks of Chlamydomonas (a green alga) as an oxygen producer with normal O2-respiring mitochondria, but after 30 minutes under anaerobic conditions in the dark it starts producing the same end-products of energy metabolism as eukaryotes with hydrogenosomes and using the same genes and enzymes [167, 168]. At face value, the theory of descent with modification (as opposed to the theory of lateral transfer) would be a good working hypothesis to explain that observation. Chlamydomonas does not have to go out and acquire new genes to survive every time that oxygen levels drop. Just because prokaryotes have lots of LGT involved in their genome evolution, we should not resort to LGT as the default explanation for the origin of shared traits among eukaryotes, because the mechanisms of chromosome heredity differ deeply across the prokaryote-eukaryote divide.

The differences between prokaryotes and eukaryotes in chromosome heredity provide cause for reflection on the origin of the cell cycle: eukaryotes have one, prokaryotes do not. The cell cycle is the basis for cell division and divides the life cycle of a eukaryotic cell into phases where genes are expressed (always in the presence of a nucleus, for reasons relating to spliceosomes [134]), genes are replicated, and genes are distributed among daughters. In eukaryotes with open mitosis, chromosome segregation occurs in the absence of a nuclear membrane [132]. The cell cycle requires the full complement of proteins that make eukaryotes complex [147], hence the cell cycle originated after the origin of mitochondria. Even in Margulis's formulations of endosymbiotic theory, the host for the origin of mitochondria had a nucleus [169]. Related to the cell cycle is the origin of sex, a major transition of early evolution in most people's books [24, 25, 170], one deserving attention from a fresh perspective.

Conclusion
There is more to evolution than will fit on any tree. For understanding major transitions in early evolution, we might not need a tree of life at all. But we need to keep our ideas testable with data from genomes or other independent data so as to keep our nose pinned to the grindstone of observations. The very early evolution of life is mostly written in the language of chemistry, some of which is (arguably) still operating today in modern metabolism if we look at the right groups [171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176]. The environments and starting material that the Earth had to offer to fuel early chemistry are variables that only geochemists can reasonably constrain [30, 177, 178]. One can make a case that acetogens (clostridial firmicutes) and hydrogenotrophic methanogens (euryarchareotes) harbour the ancestral states of microbial physiology in the eubacteria and archaebacteria respectively [179], and some trees are compatible with that view [2, 59], as is the distribution of primitive energy-conserving mechanisms [51, 52, 53, 54]. But given a transition from the elements on early Earth to replicating cells, the course of prokaryote evolution does not appear to play out along the branches of a phylogenetic tree. For example, Whitman [180] surveyed the biology and diversity of prokaryotes, showing an rRNA tree to discuss matters of classification; but branching orders in that tree play no role in his discussion of diversity or underlying evolutionary processes. If that is the direction we are headed [181], it is not all bad. But having the eukaryotes sitting on one branch in the rRNA tree of life rather than on two, as they should be (or three in the case of plants with their plastids), is far enough off the mark that we should be striving for a better representation of the relationship of eukaryotes to the two kinds of prokaryotes from which they stem.

Eukaryotes are genetic chimaeras and the role of mitochondria in the origin of that chimaerism is apparent [12, 103]. Eukaryotes are complex and the pivotal role of mitochondria in the origin of that complexity (as opposed to a pivotal role of phagocytosis) seems increasingly difficult to dispute, for energetic reasons [147]. That leaves little reasonable alternative to the view that the host for the origin of mitochondria was a prokaryote, in the simplest of competing alternatives an archaebacterium [5]. The antiquity of anaerobic energy metabolism and sulfide metabolism among eukaryotes meshes well with newer views of Proterozoic ocean chemistry [155]. A challenge remains in computing networks of genomes that include lateral gene transfers among prokaryotes and the origin of eukaryotes in the same graph. Tracking early evolution without a tree of life affords far more freedom to explore ideas than thinking with a tree in hand. The ideas need to generate predictions and be testable, though, otherwise they are not science. If we check our thoughts too quickly against a tree whose truth nobody can determine anyway, the tree begins to decide which thoughts we may or may not have and which words we may or may not use. Should a tree of life police our thoughts? Working without one is an option.
