Primitive anaerobic
protozoa: the wrong host
for mitochondria and
hydrogenosomes?

Since Mereschkowsky (22), thoughts on the
nature of the most primitive kinds of cells that
we now call eukaryotes have entailed the
notion that some cytoplasmic organelles
arose from free-living bacteria through
endosymbiosis. Endosymbiotic hypotheses
have fared extremely well when it comes
to pinpointing the similarities between
organelles and free-living bacteria as evidence
in favour of their endosymbiotic origin, both
in the case of chloroplasts (22) and mitochondria (30). But for organelles to take up
residence in a cytoplasm, there had to be a
host. Endosymbiotic hypotheses for the
origin of mitochondria have had much more
success explaining the origins of the organelle
than they have had with explaining the origin
of the host. So what was the host?
Anaerobic protists play an important role
in this issue because the host for the origin of
mitochondria has traditionally been envisaged, either explicitly or implicitly, as a
heterotrophic cell with a glycolytic pathway
that did not depend on molecular oxygen for
ATP synthesis, like contemporary protists
that have such a lifestyle. In some versions of
the endosymbiont hypothesis, the host is
envisaged as a prokaryote, but in most versions
it is envisaged as a eukaryote that either arose
autogenously (without symbiosis) or as the
result of a symbiosis of cells that occurred
prior to the origin of mitochondria (for a
random sample see 3, 6, 9, 11, 12, 15, 18, 19,
22). But in all versions of the ‘classical’
endosymbiont hypothesis that make a statement on the issue (e.g. 3, 9, 15), the host that
acquired the mitochondrion is envisaged as a
heterotroph, one that satisfied its ATP needs
with the help of the glycolytic pathway.
At present, the endosymbiont hypothesis
has three problems. First, it no longer has a
host. This is because available data indicate
that contemporary amitochondriate protists
investigated thus far – organisms which were
thought to be descendants of the host –
possessed a mitochondrion in their evolutionary past, but subsequently lost the
organelle through reduction (summarized in
9, 10, 12, 20, 25). These findings indicate that
such cells can therefore hardly be descendants
of the host in the endosymbiont hypothesis
and they furthermore intertwine the issues of
the origin of mitochondria and the origin of
eukaryotes even more tightly than before (9,
10, 12). Second, there is no clear evidence to
suggest that the host was even a heterotroph.
This is because nuclear genes for enzymes of
the glycolytic pathway in the eukaryotic
cytosol – the backbone of heterotrophy in
eukaryotes and the pathway that feeds mitochondria – appear themselves to be acquisitions from the ancestors of organelles, also in
amitochondriate protists (5, 8, 20, 21).
Eukaryotes thus seem to have acquired the
heterotrophic lifestyle that they now use,
raising the question of how they synthesized
their ATP prior to that acquisition. Third,
formulations of the endosymbiont hypothesis
that focus on the role of oxygen in the origin
of mitochondria (e.g. 2) cannot directly
account for data indicating a common
ancestry of mitochondria and hydrogenosomes – the double-membrane-bound, ATPproducing organelles of many protists that
shun oxygen-containing habitats (23, 24).
Indeed, hydrogenosomes (and ATP synthesis
in anaerobic mitochondria in general) have
been a thorn in the side of the endosymbiont
hypothesis, having been difficult to incorporate into traditional views (16, 23, 27) or
having been disregarded (19). Given these
newer findings, it is not unreasonable to
question the view that the host may have been
a hypothetical, heterotrophic, primitively
amitochondriate eukaryote, and to pursue
alternative avenues of thought.
The hydrogen hypothesis (20) is such an
alternative, one that specifically addresses the
compartmentalization and the ancestral state
of eukaryotic ATP synthesis. It avoids
the need to assume that primitively amitochondriate protists ever existed, because it
entails the premise that the host was an
Archaebacterium, not a eukaryote. It avoids
the need to assume that the host was a
heterotroph because it posits that the host was
an autotroph, one that was strictly dependent
upon molecular hydrogen as an energy and
electron source. Through explicitly formulated selective pressures for gene transfer from
symbiont to host chromosomes, it directly
accounts for the finding that eukaryotes
studied to date tend to possess a eubacterial
rather than an archaebacterial glycolytic
pathway. It also directly accounts for findings
that indicate a common ancestry of mitochondria and hydrogenosomes, because it
posits that the symbiont was a facultatively
anaerobic α-proteobacterium, one that was
able to synthesize ATP either through oxygenconsuming electron transport like mitochondria or through hydrogen-producing fermentations like hydrogenosomes, dependent upon
environmental conditions. The hydrogen
hypothesis thus differs from previous views
both on the origins of mitochondria and on the
nature of the host. It generates some of the
same predictions as the endosymbiont hypothesis does, for example that the respiratory
pathways of oxygen-consuming mitochondria
and α-proteobacteria should be homologous,
but it generates different predictions about
the origins of pathways of ATP synthesis
in hydrogenosomes than the endosymbiont
hypothesis does. It furthermore generates
very different predictions about the host, for
example that the host ultimately should
descend from the lineage of Archaebacteria
that today contains methanogens, the only
prokaryotes currently known to contain
histones (26).
Is the view that hydrogenosomes are a
‘secondary modification’ of mitochondria at
odds with the hydrogen hypothesis? No,
because this is just a roundabout way of
saying that hydrogenosomes and mitochondria share a common ancestor, since, obviously, no contemporary hydrogenosomes can
have arisen through modification of contemporary mitochondria. Rather, they must have
arisen from mitochondria that existed in the
past. So what were those ancient mitochondria like in terms of biochemical properties?
Were they like the mitochondria of the fungus
Fusarium that perform nitrate and nitrite
respiration, just as many facultatively anaerobic bacteria do (16)? Were they like
plathelminth mitochondria that perform
fumarate respiration as many facultatively
anaerobic bacteria do (27)? Were they like the
mitochondria of the ciliate Nyctotherus that
produce H2 with the help of a hydrogenase
like hydrogenosomes do (1)? Were they like
kinetoplastid mitochondria, which use
acetate:succinate CoA transferase to regenerate CoASH like hydrogenosomes do (29)?
Or were they like the mitochondria of
Euglena that, instead of the pyruvate
dehydrogenase complex, use ferredoxindependent pyruvate:NADP oxidoreductase
in a reaction that is very similar to that of
pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase (PFO) in
hydrogenosomes (14)?
These questions are intended to make the
point that there are a number of anaerobic (but
not necessarily strictly anaerobic) mitochondria known that possess and use enzymes
and/or pathways that are common to facultatively anaerobic bacteria and/or hydrogenosomes. As the simplest alternatives to explain
this observation, either (a) mitochondria arose
from strictly aerobic bacteria that did not
possess genes for enzymes of anaerobic ATPproducing pathways as found in hydrogenosomes, in which case the enzymes germane to
hydrogenosomal metabolism in the various
eukaryotic lineages that possess hydrogenosomes can be predicted to have been acquired
through independent lateral gene transfers, or
(b) the genetic starting material for this
biochemical diversity was present in a facultatively anaerobic bacterium that was the
common ancestor of mitochondria and
hydrogenosomes (20). Under the first alternative, the homologous enzymes in hydrogenosomes of different eukaryotic lineages should
be shown to stem from independent lateral
transfers involving different prokaryotic
donors. Under the second alternative, the
homologous enzymes in hydrogenosomes of
different eukaryotic lineages should be shown
to stem from a single eubacterial source (13).
More molecular data from eukaryotes that
possess hydrogenosomes and ‘atypical’ mitochondria are needed.

None of this is to detract from the importance of the observation that many eukaryotes commonly designated as ‘anaerobic’
do grow more prolifically when a bit of
oxygen is present and can be designated as
microaerophilic. In the example of the kinetoplastids, this appears to have to do with the
maintenance of redox balance, i.e. the regeneration of NAD+ (7). When oxygen is present,
bloodstream forms of trypanosomes can
regenerate additional NAD+ from glycolytic
NADH with the help of a glycerol-3-phosphate oxidase, such that one mole of water
and two moles pyruvate per mole of glucose
are produced as waste products. When no
oxygen is available, one mole each of glycerol
and pyruvate are excreted as end products
to maintain redox balance (7). In other
‘anaerobic’ or ‘microaerophilic’ protists such
as trichomonads and diplomonads, which
generate ATP solely through extended glycolysis (24), oxygen-consuming systems to
regenerate NAD+ for glycolysis, hence to
maintain redox balance, have also been
reported (4, 17). Of course, oxygen also has
important roles in eukaryotic fatty acid and
sterol biosynthesis, but traditional formulations of the endosymbiont hypothesis are at a
loss to explain why eukaryotes (also amitochondriate ones) possess eubacterial rather
than archaebacterial lipids in the first place,
whereas the hydrogen hypothesis directly
accounts for this finding as well (20). Clearly,
more work is needed on the evolution and
metabolism of eukaryotes that can grow with
little or no oxygen.
The hydrogen hypothesis invokes the
observable phenomenon of anaerobic
syntrophy (one organism gleaning a living
from the waste products of the fermentations
of another) to infer how the patterns
of compartmentalized energy metabolism
observed among contemporary eukaryotes
might have come to be. It can readily account
for a number of observations, including the
mitochondrial remnant recently described in
Entamoeba histolytica (28), an organism that
uses a homologue of hydrogenosomal PFO in
its cytosol (13) for ATP synthesis (24). The
syntrophy hypothesis (18) also invokes the
principle of anaerobic syntrophy, but derives a
heterotrophic, primitively amitochondriate
eukaryotic host and does not address the origin
of hydrogenosomes or their relationship to
mitochondria. That the hydrogenosomes of
the ciliate Nyctotherus (1) possess a remnant
of a hydrogenosomal genome bears out one of
the predictions of the hydrogen hypothesis,
rather than refuting it (in part or otherwise).
A vision of the host as a primitive eukaryote
that never possessed mitochondria is perhaps
too tantalizing for evolutionists to ignore when
dealing with the origin of this ATP-producing
organelle in its various aerobic and anaerobic
manifestations (20, 23–25, 27). The hydrogen
hypothesis predicts that upon closer examination of aerobic as well as anaerobic protozoa,
none will be found that are primitively amitochondriate. Indeed, if eukaryotes are ever
found that can be conclusively shown to have
never possessed a mitochondrial symbiont in
their evolutionary history, the hydrogen
hypothesis would be falsified. The endosymbiont hypothesis is currently in search of a
formulation that is sufficiently explicit as to
generate similarly falsifiable predictions about
the host that acquired mitochondria. That
search may or may not be fruitful.
