Development and Evolution through the Lens of Global Gene Regulation

Trends
The study of development and evolution is mutually illuminating.

Spatiotemporal patterns of gene expression across germ layers provide evidence that the endoderm was the first germ layer to evolve.

Comparing transcriptome dynamics throughout developmental time across species reveals a stagelike mode of embryogenesis.

The developmental transcriptomes of animal species of different phyla reveal conserved early and late modules of gene expression.

The mid-developmental transition connecting the two modules matches the previously identified phylotypic stages in three of the species where it has been characterized.

The mid-developmental transition is under strong developmental constraints.

Evolution and development are two inherently intertwined processes. As the embryo develops it does so in ways that both reflect past constraints and bias the future evolution of the species. While research exploiting this insight typically studies individual genes, transcriptomic analyses have sparked a new wave of discoveries. In this opinion piece, I review the evidence arising from transcriptomics on the topics of the evolution of germ layers, the phylotypic stage, and developmental constraints. The spatiotemporal pattern of gene expression across germ layers provides evidence that the endoderm was the first germ layer to evolve. Comparing transcriptome dynamics throughout developmental time across distant species reveals a mid-developmental transition under strong developmental constraints. These studies highlight the efficiency of exploratory data analysis using computational tools and comparative approaches for discovery.

‘Evo-Dev-Omics’
The notion that development (or ontogeny) and evolution (or phylogeny) are inter-related has a long intellectual history [1]. In many languages, for example, the same word doubles for development and evolution ( in Hebrew). Recognizing the deep connection, Charles Darwin reviewed numerous embryological studies as evidence for his theory of evolution in Chapter 14 of On the Origin of Species[2]. Ernst Haeckel, his colleague in Germany, furthered this connection by highlighting one particular stage during embryogenesis – the tail-bud stage with its similarly developing notochord, body segments, and pharyngeal arches – because of its apparent conservation across vertebrates [3]. In more recent times, this same stage has been renamed the phylotypic stage, to reflect the notion that it is characteristic of all chordate species. Furthermore, the ‘hourglass model’ of evolution was proposed to account for the observation that differences across a set of species are concentrated at the ends of embryogenesis (Figure 1A) 4, 5.

A second general principle in animal development is the notion of germ layers. While all true animals (eumetazoans) have at least two germ layers, the ectoderm and the endoderm, most have three, including the mesoderm, and it has been proposed that neural crest cells should be considered a fourth germ layer [6], unique to chordates. It is not immediately obvious, however, how the first two germ layers – the endoderm and the ectoderm – initially arose. These large questions are of interest because they may reveal the constraints facing extant species.

The notion of gene regulatory networks (GRNs) has been transformative for the entire field of developmental biology, as well as the evolutionary developmental biology (evo-devo) community [7]. In particular, Eric Davidson and colleagues provided overwhelming support for the idea that development is best understood as the execution of gene regulation. The notion that underlying the developmental process is a large GRN – a combination of transcription factors and signaling pathways – has great explanatory power. It provides not only a context for understanding a process but also for testing specific hypotheses about gene regulation by knockouts and overexpression. The blind side of this approach, however, may be that it is highly reductionist in nature. In limiting the range of study to a handful of genes, the overall pattern of gene regulatory changes had been ignored. Thus, while GRNs are magnificently useful, their power would be improved if they could also explain large-scale morphological stages, such as gastrulation or morphogenesis. For example, what is the timing of one subnetwork relative to another? Are GRNs that are highly conserved across species also ones with specific properties? While Davidson and Erwin [7] did advance provocative notions regarding how certain GRN elements, such as kernels, plug-ins, and gene batteries, may be used throughout evolution [7], these have been difficult to test using the available GRNs.

Transcriptomic studies constitute analysis at an intermediate level between morphology and GRNs [8]. The advent of microarrays in the late 1990s and RNA-Seq since 2008 has allowed researchers to study the overall transcriptomic picture of a given biological sample (or nearly overall since it does not typically include small RNAs and other nonpolyadenylated transcripts) 9, 10. Transcription may be regarded as the first phenotype of the genotype since it is the gateway to any expression of the genetic material. As such, it is valuable to view the entirety of gene regulation at a given stage of development, as opposed to a subset of genes. However, simply measuring transcription does not immediately reveal the underlying GRN. As in Plato’s analogy of the cave where shadows are distinguished from the objects that throw them, studying gene expression allows us to witness events without necessarily understanding their causal relationships. This lack of complete knowledge notwithstanding, the composition and dynamics of global gene regulation allow us to explore mass amounts of data to formulate testable hypotheses, which may eventually lead to a complete causal and comprehensive model of development.

In this opinion piece, I review insights from recent studies of development and evolution revealing the history-influenced pattern by which an organism develops and how this process in turn constrains evolution [11].

Punctuated Embryogenesis: Development Is Fundamentally Stagelike
Aristotle, and many researchers that followed, have looked at animal embryos and observed distinct stages as the organism progresses from egg to animal. For example, there are the gastrula, the neurula, and the tail-bud stages in chordate development. However, other researchers have argued that ‘stages appear in the mind of the biologist and not in the larvae’ (Hicks quoted in [12]). Likewise, the appearance of developmental stages in the embryo may suggest a kind of modularity throughout embryogenesis or it may just be a fascinating artifact of a process that is fundamentally continuous.

Studying transcriptomic profiles across morphological stages enables the study of the molecular properties that characterize them. When observing Caenorhabditis elegans nematode embryos, a recent work identified ten developmental stages spanning embryogenesis, including gastrulation, the comma stage, and the hatched larva [13]. These ten morphological stages may each have a characteristic transcriptome or, alternatively, morphological stages and their transcriptomes may be decoupled. To distinguish between these scenarios, other nematode species that develop through the same stages though at different rates were included in the analysis. The notion was that the different developmental timings among the species could be used to determine if there are stages whose transcriptome is independent of the timing differences. In other words, if a stage – or milestone – of embryogenesis exists, the transcriptome at this stage is expected to be unaffected by species-specific variations in developmental timings. To test this notion, embryos were collected from each of five nematode species at each of the ten stages and their transcriptomes were assayed. As a molecular proxy for the gene regulatory states, the transcriptome provided a global picture of gene regulation throughout development.

As a first clue that development is indeed punctuated in a stagelike fashion, as opposed to resembling a gradual process, a strong acceleration in the number of expressed genes per minute was detected following entry into some of the examined nematode stages (Figure 1B) [13]. Intuitively, we might expect that the more time passing between stages in the embryo, the more change we would find at the gene expression level. Indeed, this is what was observed for the transition from Stage 3 to Stage 4 (Figure 1C). In those species where more time separates the stages, more expression divergence was also observed, suggesting that there is no unique relationship between these stages and the underlying transcriptomes. However, for certain stages the timing differences across the species did not correlate with gene expression changes. For example, the time it takes to go from Stage 3 to 7 varies across the five species, yet the expression differences between them are the same (Figure 1C). This suggests that the developmental processes occurring at Stage 7 punctuate the gene expression program and thus that there is the same relationship between Stage 3 and 7 in each species, irrespective of the timing differences among the species.

One of these nematode milestones – the ventral enclosure stage, which precedes morphogenesis and is a period of intense integration among the germ layers – had the following tell-tale signs of being the nematode phylotypic stage. The genes induced at this stage are enriched in crucial developmental regulators such as homeobox transcription factors and cell–cell interaction signaling genes. This set of genes is also enriched with knockdown phenotypes such as paralysis suggesting the particular importance of this stage as a milestone for integration across the specified cell types [13].

Most interestingly, this analysis identified the molecular basis for distinct embryonic stages, which were named ‘milestones’. In a sense these milestones punctuate gene regulation in the developing embryo. Fundamentally, development at the molecular level may be thought of as organized in a modular fashion as opposed to a continuous process. These milestones are characterized by invariance to changes in species-specific timings, low transcriptional activity followed by bursts of expression.

The notion of developmental milestones reviewed here, introduced by Levin et al.[13], is supported by previous work. Kalinka et al.[14] compared gene expression throughout embryogenesis in six Drosophila species, fitting a linear model to the data to account for the global average of each gene, the species effect, the time effect, and measures of the technical noise. Comparing across species, the average variance in gene expression showed the hourglass pattern where the time of greatest conservation was at 8–10 h. This period in development includes the extended germ-band stage, which is generally regarded as the arthropod phylotypic stage [15].

Furthermore, Domazet-Lošo and Tautz [16] used phylostratigraphy (see below and Figure 2) to determine that one period in zebrafish development expresses older genes than other stages. This stage was the late segmentation/early pharyngula stage that is generally seen as the phylotypic stage in chordates. Moreover, a comparison of Xenopus laevis and Xenopus tropicalis embryos revealed a convergence as well at the early pharyngula (tail-bud) stage [17]. This approach has also been extended beyond animals, to plants and fungi, where a mid-developmental stage has been characterized with enrichment for genes of older origin 18, 19. Together, these ideas support a stagelike mode of development that is modular rather than gradual.

The Natural History of the Germ Layers
One of the first steps that occur during embryonic development is the delineation of which cells will end up on the inside of the animal, which on the outside, and which in between. This division into three cell types, termed germ layers, is universal to all bilaterian animals and has been one of the foremost organizing principles in all of biology. Despite the importance of delineating the germ layers, there is no consensus in the field of evolutionary developmental biology on the initial steps that form two-germ-layered metazoans 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.

In a recent study, the history of the germ layers was examined in a work that began with the nematode C. elegans[25]. Using single-cell RNA-Seq [26], the germ layer of expression was determined for the first time for all genes throughout embryonic development. The authors found unexpectedly that the different germ layers have distinct global gene expression dynamics (Figure 1D). Surprisingly, the induction of endoderm genes occurs before many genes are expressed in the other germ layers. Next, a wave of ectoderm regulators is induced, and finally the mesoderm genes. This sequential induction of the germ layers suggested a recapitulation of their evolutionary appearance, since it was consistent with the mesoderm being both the last to develop and to evolve.

Interestingly, within this model the endoderm is the first germ layer to evolve. Two lines of evidence further supported the notion. The first came from studying the ages of genes, or ‘phylostratigraphy’ [16] (see Figure 2D). This approach examines the phylogenetic distribution of orthologous genes to infer the timing of their first appearance. If a gene, for example, is present in all organisms, then it is likely the case that their common ancestor had the gene and that they all inherited it. From this inference the phylostratigraphy method would conclude that the gene arose a long time ago. Alternatively, if the breadth of an orthologous group of genes is limited to a small clade of species, then it may be inferred that the gene is of a more recent origin. Studying the phylogenetic ages of the germ-layer-specific genes, it was revealed that endoderm genes are considerably older than ectoderm and mesoderm genes [25].

Insight also came from examining the expression of orthologs of the germ-layer-specific genes in other species. Orthologs of the C. elegans endoderm genes are expressed in the sponge in the precise stage at which two layers first become apparent (the ‘brown’ stage) [27]. Moreover, in Nematostella and Xenopus, endoderm genes are expressed before ectoderm genes [13]. Together, analysis of the dynamics, phylogenetic ages, and orthologous expression of the complete germ layer gene expression programs provides evidence that the endoderm was the first germ layer to evolve hundreds of millions of years ago and how this event constrains the process of development in the present. Of note is that this result is at odds with a previous phylostratigraphic analysis, which concluded that the ectoderm was older than the endoderm [28]. This analysis focused on Drosophila melanogaster genes and annotations of its germ layer gene sets. One explanation for the opposite conclusion is that the germ layer annotations were limited to candidate genes and performed on differentiated tissues, whereas in the C. elegans analysis, the entire transcriptome throughout early development was studied. It is interesting to consider what other developmental constraints might be in place today and which are maintained during embryogenesis in this form over the eons.

A Universal Signature of Animal Development
Animals comprise a monophyletic group on the tree of life, showing an exuberance of diversity and spanning five orders of magnitude of adult body sizes. Comparing the process of embryogenesis of different animal species has illuminated conserved aspects within metazoans 1, 2, 3. Searching for a common molecular property within metazoans, one study identified one influential family of genes to be found in diverse animals, the Hox genes, which are expressed during mid-embryogenesis and named this the ‘zootype’ [29]. However, sampling from additional metazoan species revealed flaws in this definition: poriferans (sponges), ctenophores (comb jellies), and placozoans (Trichoplax adhaerens) do not contain the Hox cluster 30, 31, 32, suggesting that there may be another aspect of development in animal evolution that may be universal to all animals.

Animals have been classically grouped into ‘phyla’ – of which 35 are typically recognized – the basis of each being a distinct body plan [33]. Evidence for the existence of phyla comes from the classical observation that development of species in some phyla exhibits similarity in morphologies during embryogenesis while adults appear more different. However, the phyla classification and the notion of a ‘phylotypic period’ have been criticized as lacking an objective definition, and consequently being based on arbitrary groupings of animals 34, 35.

To better compare phyla, a recent work studied ten species, each from a different phylum, including a ctenophore, a sponge, a cnidarian, a planaria, and a segmented worm [36]. For each species, the expression profile of all genes throughout development from the fertilized egg to the free-living larvae was determined. Comparing the expression of orthologs, the early transcriptomes appeared similar across species, as well as the transcriptomes of later stages. Surprisingly, these two modes of expression constituted distinct modules with a sharp switch between them, named the mid-developmental transition (Figure 1E). Interestingly, this two-module property appeared to be a conserved property across the examined species, and is perhaps a general architecture of animal embryogenesis. Studying which genes represent the modules, the early module was found to be enriched in cell cycle and chromatin changes suggesting mitoses, and that the late module is enriched in cell type-specific genes such as myosin for muscle. By contrast, genes expressed during the transition between the modules are enriched in signaling pathways and transcriptional factors.

In one sense, the gene enrichments are expected since generally in developmental biology (i) cells are first made, (ii) they are directed to particular locations, and (iii) they differentiate to provide their physiological function. More interesting though is that mapping the mid-developmental transition to the morphological stages informs our understanding of development. In the three species where it was previously defined, the mid-developmental transition coincides with the phylotypic stage. For example, in C. elegans, the mid-developmental transition between the early and late modules maps to the ventral enclosure stage, discussed earlier. This suggests that the phylotypic stage is now predictable in any organism by simply identifying the occurrence of the mid-developmental transition.

Studying which specific transcription factor families and signaling pathways function during the mid-developmental transition of any species revealed another surprise. While homeodomain genes were enriched in all of the species, little else was conserved. Moreover, a global analysis of the conservation of the early module, mid-developmental transition, and late module revealed that the mid-developmental transition is the most variable stage across phyla. This pattern was still evident after taking into account methodological issues [37]. These observations point to an inverse hourglass model to explain the differences among species, where the body-plan uniqueness of each phylum occurs during the mid-developmental transition of each phylum (Figure 1A). Interestingly, the inverse hourglass model has also been recently reported in the evolution of floral branching in plants [38].

How does the inverse hourglass model for phyla evolution square with the hourglass model? The two do not necessarily lead to a contradiction, since the hourglass model summarized variation for species of the same phylum, while the inverse hourglass summarized variation across phyla. In fact, the two suggest a possible molecular definition of a phylum. A phylum may be defined as a set of species that show conservation at the phylotypic stage, while showing the opposite – an increased level of differences – when compared with other species. Many questions are left unanswered by this work: is the coupling of the conserved modules universal to all multicellular life? What precise molecular pathways underlie the mid-developmental transition of each phylum? Why are the mid-developmental transition mechanisms so relatively impenetrate to change? This study does provide, however, an interesting signature that is possibly universal to all animals and takes on the concept of phyla, which while full of baggage is one that becomes relevant when we consider that body plans are laid down during the mid-developmental transition.

Developmental Constraints Maintain the Mid-developmental Transition
In the previous sections, I reviewed patterns that reveal the common ancestry of developmental systems. What mechanisms might account for these? In the case of the hourglass pattern, what leads to this pattern? One way to think about the problem is to assume that within a population of organisms that included the last common ancestor of all nematodes, development was virtually identical. Today, however, the development is not identical across the descendants that now account for different species. The differences are not uniformly distributed but rather are concentrated at the ends of development. One explanation for this bias may be positive selection: that is, that the ends of development may be under positive selection, thus accounting for the similarity among the mid-development of the species. Alternatively, the middle of development may be under constraints: either few mutations are possible, which alter the middle of development, or are under purifying selection such that whenever the mutations occur they are efficiently weeded out from the population. From this view, we would consider the evolution of embryogenesis as biased since many variations affect vital processes and lead to nonviable organisms.

The best way to address this problem is to study the phenotypic consequences of variation in a population and to ask if these are biased for particular stages of development. A problem with this approach, however, is that the variation in a population is relatively limited such that gene expression differences in development between two individuals in a population may be few and far between. A recent work has provided an interesting alternative by using C. elegans mutation accumulation (MA) strains [39]. These strains have experienced a strange – and useful – mode of evolution for 250 generations: in each generation, one progeny of the 300 produced by a single worm is randomly selected to spawn the next generation [40]. What is unique then about these strains is that any mutation that occurred in the lucky worm selected to span the next generation is immediately fixed in the population and thus each of the 250 strains contains more mutations relative to the ancestor strain than would have been observed over only 250 generations. More interestingly, the power of positive selection has been nearly completely eliminated. The mutations that appear, however, are not completely random because those that are lethal would by definition not lead to an animal that can be selected for the next generation. Studying the effects on different periods of development, these mutations thus allow us to reveal developmental constraints on embryogenesis.

In one such study the transcriptomes of 19 MA strains across seven developmental stages were analyzed [39]. Analyzing the data set, uneven distributions of variation were evident across developmental time (Figure 1F). Early development showed more evolution than mid-development; later development was also less constrained than mid-development. In particular, the expression of the homeodomain genes was among the most conserved gene group across the MA strains. This result provides strong experimental evidence for constraints in development, since they indicate that even in the absence of positive selection, the phylotypic stage is slower to accumulate change relative to other earlier and later stages.

Studying developmental constraints at the population level leads to other interesting questions. How would it be possible to further distinguish between purifying selection and mutational robustness? How do embryonic stages emerge? Given developmental constraints on stages, how can new phyla evolve? How are the developmental constraints manifested in cells of different cell types? Is this pattern specific to nematodes or general to all phyla? This approach should be useful to others asking such questions relating to selective pressures on developmental properties such as aging, developmental novelties, and disease.

Concluding Remarks
The view of the embryo that emerges from these studies is that of an amalgam of overlapping modules, each experiencing different developmental constraints. The germ layers evolved sequentially, and this history remains observable in the way that each embryo builds itself. At a fundamental level, embryogenesis is a juxtaposition of two modules, where the transition is under unique developmental constraints. Thus, while development may appear as a continuous process, our methods have revealed the modularity of processes and the inherent tension among the genes that form our genetic heritage [41]. These discoveries may only have been able to be detected when comparing the transcriptome and not just individual genes, since the former is more amenable to mining for new patterns (see Outstanding Questions).

The exploration of data discussed here is largely dependent on computational biology, which should be considered a data-driven, theoretically-minded, and integrative science. It is a distinctly fruitful and effective mode of science; one that is complementary to more traditional life science fields. Modern experiments are yielding data sets that are too large to be analyzed by traditional methods. Exploring such large data sets is neither routine nor trivial, and requires a creative process where initial hypotheses are likely (hopefully) superseded with unexpected observations. Thus, while in today’s scientific enterprise great emphasis is placed on hypothesis-driven research, computational biology is complementary, providing techniques that allow for hypothesis generation. Together, these two modes of science provide a more realistic picture of how science can be effective [42]. Indeed, recognizing that crucial hypotheses can and often do arise from data-driven fishing expeditions is something that is important to communicate to our funding bodies and other scientific institutions.

Studying the data sets described here, for example, required special computational tools, algorithms, and visualization; otherwise, the hidden secrets of the data are essentially forfeited, and analysis does not move beyond a handful of genes (Figure 2). The patterns of transcriptome correlations throughout development can reveal aspects of the dynamics and allow one to distinguish important stages. By sorting the gene expression profiles according to their time of expression, one can glean the number of genes expressed at each stage. Further, when comparing time courses for different species, one can compare the relative expression of each gene in the temporal sequence. Cross-referencing the expression information with other annotation is invaluable and two methods are gene set enrichment analysis and phylostratigraphy (Figure 2). For example, for a given transcriptome, it is helpful to study which functional categories are enriched in the genes specifically expressed. This can be done by screening through groups of genes with the same Gene Ontology term (or other such groupings of functionally related genes) and computing the statistical enrichment. The age of a gene (phylostratigraphy) can be inferred from the pattern of occurrences of its orthologs in other genomes. These tools are all increasingly helpful in exploring the data for novel insights.

While the global gene regulatory approaches described here were applied to evolutionary developmental biology, the same lens can be focused to other biomedical fields. For example, it may be used to address somatic evolution occurring during the life of a human. Cancer is an evolutionary process that happens since the cells of the body form a population with cells that pass on variation that occasionally affect their relative fitness to one another. When we take antibiotics, we are presenting the microbiome with a selection step, thus evolving it in particular directions. Our immune system adapts by shifting the composition of our antibody production. In addition, somatic evolution occurs in the germline which can lead to birth defects. Studying these processes at the global gene regulatory levels promises a new generation of discoveries.

Outstanding Questions
Is the coupling of the two broad modules during embryogenesis universal to all multicellular life, including plants and fungi? What is the genetic origin of this coupling?

What precise molecular pathways underlie the mid-developmental transition of each phylum?

How would it be possible to further distinguish between purifying selection and mutational robustness as the developmental constraints that act during embryogenesis? How are developmental constraints manifested in cells of different cell types?

What is the genetic pattern and mechanisms by which developmental stages evolve?

What developmental constraints continue to impinge upon the relative temporal induction of the germ layer gene regulatory programs?
