Developmental constraints shape the evolution of the nematode mid-developmental transition

Article | Published: 27 March 2017

Developmental constraints shape the evolution of the nematode mid-developmental transition
Harel Zalts & Itai Yanai
Nature Ecology & Evolution volume 1, Article number: 0113 (2017) | Download Citation

Abstract
Evolutionary theory assumes that genetic variation is uniform and gradual in nature, yet morphological and gene expression studies have revealed that different life-stages exhibit distinct levels of cross-species conservation. In particular, a stage in mid-embryogenesis is highly conserved across species of the same phylum, suggesting that this stage is subject to developmental constraints, either by increased purifying selection or by a strong mutational bias. An alternative explanation, however, holds that the same ‘hourglass’ pattern of variation may result from increased positive selection at the earlier and later stages of development. To distinguish between these scenarios, we examined gene expression variation in a population of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans using an experimental design that eliminated the influence of positive selection. By measuring gene expression for all genes throughout development in 20 strains, we found that variations were highly uneven throughout development, with a significant depletion during mid-embryogenesis. In particular, the family of homeodomain transcription factors, whose expression generally coincides with mid-embryogenesis, evolved under high constraint. Our data further show that genes responsible for the integration of germ layers during morphogenesis are the most constrained class of genes. Together, these results provide strong evidence for developmental constraints as the mechanism underlying the hourglass model of animal evolution. Understanding the pattern and mechanism of developmental constraints provides a framework to understand how evolutionary processes have interacted with embryogenesis and led to the diversity of animal life on Earth.

One of the most striking features of the living world is its sheer diversity. Accounting for how the process of evolution lends itself to the creation of diversity constitutes an important topic in evolutionary and developmental biology1,​2,​3,​4. Although classical and population geneticists have made great progress towards an understanding of heredity and the process of natural selection, the structure of variation available to the latter remains largely unsolved1,2. Instead, the notion that “universal variability — small in amount but in every direction”5 exists for the agency of natural selection forms one of the founding pillars of modern evolutionary theory6. But research in the field of evolutionary developmental biology has challenged this view7,8, by invoking the concept of developmental constraints, defined as “a bias on the production of variant phenotypes or a limitation on phenotypic variability caused by the structure, character, composition, or dynamics of the developmental system”9. Thus, the development of a species may significantly influence its evolutionary trajectory in terms of biases for particular variations and constraints against others. However, the general patterns underlying how these constraints apply to developmental systems are not clear.

Since the nineteenth century, it has been recognized that a stage occurring during vertebrate embryonic development has strikingly high morphological similarity10,11. More recently, similar results have emerged in other phyla12,​13,​14. These observations coalesced into the now classic ‘hourglass’ model of embryonic development15, in which the height corresponds to the progression of development and the width reflects the restriction of variation15,​16,​17. Comparing gene expression on a global scale, a phylotypic stage of gene expression was also detected in flies18, nematodes19 and vertebrates20,21. Strikingly, gene expression similarity also corresponded with morphological resemblance21,22. An hourglass shape was further suggested in the development of plants23,24 and fungi25.

The phylotypic stage has been functionally associated with the expression of homeodomain transcription factors15,21,26,27, known to play key roles in the establishment of the body plan. Other important features include the enrichment for perturbation phenotypes19 and higher levels of purifying selection on DNA sequences of genes expressed during this stage20. Yet, the mechanism underlying the hourglass shape of diversification remains unknown. It has been suggested that purifying selection acts strongly on gene expression during mid-embryogenesis20. However, this notion has been debated, with some studies concluding no evidence for a phylotypic stage28,29. Developmental constraint may also appear in the form of a bias against mutations altering the expression of genes functioning during the phylotypic stage. Alternatively, earlier and later stages of development — the maternal dowry contained in the oocyte and the free-living larvae — may be highly adaptive. Increased positive selection on these stages relative to the middle of development would also lead to an observed hourglass model of conservation. Thus, the evolutionary mechanism underlying the phylotypic stage remains to be elucidated.

In this work, we attempt to disentangle the effects of developmental constraints and positive selection acting throughout embryonic development. For this purpose, we used mutation-accumulation (MA) strains. To generate MA strains, in each generation the population size is reduced to the minimum required for propagation — a single hermaphrodite — and thus all but the most highly deleterious mutations are effectively neutral, while positive selection is practically eliminated30. We used C. elegans MA strains that are each 250 generations apart from the wild-type ancestor31. To dissect the components of variation, we used RNA-Seq to read out global gene expression across a set of MA strains throughout their embryonic development. Using these data, we identified a period of distinct developmental constraint during mid-embryogenesis. Our results also provide insight into the evolution of development and provide powerful evidence for the developmental constraint manifested by the mid-developmental transition.

Results
To study the evolution of gene expression programs throughout embryogenesis, we selected 19 mutation accumulation (MA) strains (Fig. 1a). For these strains, as well as for the wild-type ancestor, we collected embryos from seven distinct stages throughout development, ranging from the four-cell stage embryo to the hatched larva (Fig. 1a). To average out the effects of individual embryos, each sample consisted of pools of 10 individually staged embryos (see Methods). We then used RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) to measure the expression levels of all genes in each of the samples (Fig. 1a; see Methods). As a control to account for within-line variation in gene expression — biological and technical — we collected quadruplicates for one of the MA strains (MA 522) for each of the seven stages.

We assessed the quality of the dataset using several analyses. Comparing the transcriptomes across stages and strains, we found that samples clustered according to stages (Fig. 1b), suggesting that gene expression differences across development overwhelm differences across the different strains. For each stage, however, the transcriptomes of the MA strains had significantly greater differences than those of the replicate transcriptomes, indicating detectable gene expression differences (Supplementary Fig. 1). Studying the data at the level of individual genes, we found patterns of conservation and divergence (Fig. 1c). For example, genes noah-1, B0365.9 and C07D10.5 each show a near-identical pattern of developmental gene expression across the 20 strains. The gene coel-1, however, showed strain-specific differences; although gene expression in the wild type gradually increases over time, some of the strains exhibited early expression while others showed a decrease in late expression.

We found that principal components analysis on the normalized gene expression profiles orders genes in a circle within the axes of the first two principal components, where the angle from the origin reflects their relative onset of expression (Fig. 2a; see Methods). This angle then served as a proxy for the relative temporal expression, from early to late, in embryonic development (Fig. 2b), where early expression captures the maternal deposit and late expression is the expression of the larvae. Repeating this analysis across the strains enabled us to obtain, for each gene, the relative order in each of the strains. We summarized these relative orders by averaging their differences from the mean (see Methods). To control for technical variation, we subtracted from this index the analogous index as computed on the four biological replicates (see Methods). We henceforth refer to this corrected index as the evolvability score (ES). For example, the noah-1 gene has a similar temporal order of expression across the strains, whereas the mrpl-34 gene shows more variation (Fig. 2c) as observed in the gene expression profiles (Fig. 1c).

To study whether gene expression differences are equally dispersed throughout embryogenesis, or whether specific periods of development are relatively refractory to change, we examined windows of ES across the time sorted genes (Supplementary Fig. 2a). For each window, we compared its set of ES values with the set of overall ES values representing all dynamically expressed genes. We found a striking pattern of conservation and divergences throughout embryogenesis (Fig. 2d). Early developmental stages showed high ES, signifying relatively more variation across the MA strains. Later stages were more conserved (low ES), with one period during mid-embryogenesis showing particularly high conservation across the MA strains (Kolmogorov–Smirnov test, P < 10−9). The changes were gradual in sequential windows, suggesting smooth transitions. We found similar results when controlling for the number of genes expressed at each period (Supplementary Fig. 3c–e). Moreover, the signal was absent or not significant when studying randomly ordered profiles or on the biological replicates (Kolmogorov–Smirnov test, Supplementary Fig. 3a,b,f,g). Thus, whereas we might have expected similar ES values throughout development, we saw significant shifts that prompted us to investigate the corresponding developmental stages.

Matching the windows to developmental stages (Supplementary Fig. 2a,b), we found that the significantly conserved windows are most correlated with embryos from stage 4 and stage 5 (Fig. 2e). Interestingly, stage 4 corresponds to the ventral enclosure stage, previously inferred to be the nematode phylotypic stage19,32. Thus, at the population-level, we find evidence for developmental constraint at a stage previously known to be under increased conservation across species. Moreover, we show here that gene expression diverged between these strains to form an hourglass, although early development is far more divergent. The windows showing the most variation correspond to stage 2, which is the start of gastrulation when the zygotic transcriptome comes to dominate relative to the maternally deposited transcriptome.

Because MA strains evolve in the near-absence of positive selection, our results across a population suggest that developmental constraint on mid-development is a sufficient mechanism to account for the same hourglass-shaped pattern of evolution within a phylum. To inquire about the specific biological processes active at the mid-developmental stage, as well as their conservation within MA strains, we turned to Gene Ontology (GO) annotations, as well as curated signalling pathways, and transcription factor families (see Methods). For each such functional group, we queried for significant differences between ES for the genes of the group with the ES of the overall set (Kolmogorov–Smirnov test, P < 0.05). For example, we found that the genes included in the ‘gastrulation’ GO had significantly higher ES than expected. ‘Nucleic acid binding’ and ‘DNA damage response’ were also among the most significantly divergent gene sets across the MA strains. These three classes are generally expressed in the early period of development, which was observed above to be more evolvable (Fig. 3a). In contrast, the family of homeodomain transcription factors are significantly conserved across MA strains (Fig. 3b). Interestingly, their average expression shows a transient expression in the middle of development (Fig. 3a) and overlaps with the conserved stage in mid-embryogenesis (Fig. 4b). This period also maps to the transition between the previously identified early and late module of embryogenesis32. The homeo­domain transcription factors are known to play key roles in patterning during embryogenesis and other developmental stages, and their expression is enriched during the phylotypic stage16,20. Together with the previous results, we conclude that the genetic changes in MA strains cause significantly less variation in gene expression during mid-embryogenesis compared with other developmental stages. Intriguingly, homeodomain genes are expressed at high levels during this stage.

A previous study from our laboratory examined five C. elegans founder-cell lineages individually as they develop in vitro33 (Supplementary Fig. 4a). We asked whether comparing this data with our evolvability measurements can provide additional insight into the origin of the phylotypic stage, by examining cell-type specific expression. For this, we analysed four sets of genes delineated in the study: genes specifically expressed in the endoderm, ectoderm or mesoderm, and a fourth group of genes whose expression is absent in the in vitro lineages yet which show expression in the whole embryo (Fig. 4a). We refer to these as ‘integration genes’, as their expression is dependent upon interactions among the cell types. Testing for the conservation of gene expression patterns of the germ layer and integration gene sets across the MA strains, we found that the four groups are significantly conserved (Fig. 4b). The integration genes, however, are the most conserved gene group, notably also relative to the 74 gene ontology terms examined (P < 10−16, Kolmogorov–Smirnov test, Fig. 4b).

Examining the timing of expression across these four groups, we found that the average expression of the integration genes occurs during the conserved stage in mid-embryogenesis, concurrently with the endoderm and ectoderm programme (Fig. 4b). Interestingly, comparing our dataset with that of previous work from our laboratory33, we found that the mid-developmental programme appears partially stuck in the in vitro lineages (Supplementary Fig. 4b). Thus, consistent with the notion of the ventral enclosure stage as a period of integration across lineages, the developmental programme diverges in the absence of cell-communication at this stage. These results therefore suggest that expression of the integration genes results from communication across the germ layers. Indeed, the integration gene set is enriched in cell-communication and signalling functions (Supplementary Table 1). Moreover, the signalling component is more conserved than the transcription factors, reflecting their importance to the architecture of the mid-developmental transition.

Discussion
In this work, we used mutation accumulation strains to study the evolvability of stages during embryonic development. Because these strains evolved in the absence of positive selection, we were able to dissect the levels of constraints on gene expression changes associated with each stage of development. Here, we discuss the implications of these results in terms of a refined model for the evolution of development, and an extension of our approach to detect positive selection. We also discuss what light our results might shed on germ-layer evolution of animal development.

Although gene expression throughout development has been compared across species in many studies18,​19,​20,​21,​22,​23,​24,32, this is the first study to do so across mutation accumulation strains. Interestingly, the pattern of evolvability that we found (Fig. 2d) showed a similarity to the proposed hourglass model of evolution (Fig. 4c). Early embryogenesis showed the lowest level of constraint relative to the other stages, whereas a middle stage in development, previously characterized as the nematode phylotypic stage19,32, is under the highest constraint. The paucity of gene expression changes in the middle of embryogenesis may be explained either by an increase in purifying selection at that stage, or by a relative lack of possible genetic variations that alter the mid-developmental expression programme (that is, mutational robustness)34. Under either scenario, however, developmental constraints are differentially imposed on stages of embryogenesis. The concept of developmental constraint is typically referred to when discussing “restraints on phenotypic production”35. Here, we are invoking this concept in the field of what is essentially the first phenotype of the genome, namely transcription. And although gene expression is not the phenotype generally considered when comparing species, we believe that this extension of the concept is helpful in understanding the pattern of differences across the mutation accumulation strains. We thus conclude that our results are compatible with strong developmental constraints on the phylotypic stage. One important caveat, however, is that our analysis of the ‘evolvability’ measure is limited to studying heterochrony, rather than sensitivity to changes in gene activity or function.

Our results indicate that later development is less constrained than mid-development for evolutionary change. A similar result was previously described in comparisons of species belonging to the same phylum18,24,36. However, the ratio between early and late divergence is larger in our work, in which we compared different strains of the same species. In contrast, when distant species from different phyla were compared, late embryogenesis appeared more variable than early embryogenesis32,37. It is possible that between closely related species, late development is under strong constraints as these share a body plan, patterned during the late part of embryogenesis. Collectively, our results imply that late embryogenesis is more constrained than the part of embryogenesis that precedes the mid-developmental transition. This inference might be explained by the notion that the early expression of genes (like those involved in gastrulation) may be more variable because activities need only accumulate prior to use, whereas later genes depend on independent interactions from multiple tissues happening at the same time.

Although our results show that positive selection is not required to explain the increased constraint of mid-development, we do not test whether positive selection is also constrained from acting during mid-development. For example, it may be that the early and late stages of development are more receptive to positive selection. To test this, we propose that a similar approach to the one presented here may be applied to strains experimentally evolved to be fitter by some measurable criterion using experimental evolution. Comparing the evolvability in such strains would allow the characterization of the developmental constraints imposed by positive selection. This might be achieved by studying ‘recovery lines’, in which the MA strains are grown in large populations for several generations38.

Analysing gene subgroups provided us with further insights into the evolution of embryonic development. The importance of the Hox gene cluster during the phylotypic stage has been shown in several works15,17,19,21. Here, we expand this finding to the entire homeodomain transcription factor gene family and find that this functional group is among the most conserved in expression across the MA strains. This result further suggests that the time at which many homeodomain genes function is strongly constrained and implicates them in a crucial role during mid-embryogenesis. An addition functional group of highly conserved genes was those that we termed the ‘integration genes’ (Fig. 4). These genes have expression patterns that are dependent on interaction among the founder blastomeres33 and we found that they are mostly expressed during the phylotypic stage. The relative lack of constraint detected during gastrulation across the MA strains may be buffered during the phylotypic stage in part owing to the expression of these integration genes.

Our work also allows us to propose some insight into the evolution of animal development. We previously proposed that the endoderm was the first germ layer to evolve, as it is expressed first and is composed of genes of ancient phylogenetic age33. Considering the expression pattern of the homeodomain and integration genes, as well as their low variability in MA strains, leads us to further speculate that the phylotypic stage may be intrinsically related to the evolution of the ectoderm germ layer. In this scenario, the mid-developmental transition (which we are using synonymously with the phylotypic stage) may have had the dual purpose of both introducing a new germ layer — the ectoderm – and coordinating its work with the existing germ layer, the endoderm. Although there are animals without a Hox cluster (Amphimedon and Mnemiopsis), all have homeodomain transcription factors, and their expression may be intimately related to the mid-developmental transition. Because all eumetazoans are dependent on both the endoderm and the ectoderm, the transition that underlies their interface may be under such strong developmental constraint because of its ancestral origins, which form an unchangeable architectural artifice of development.

Methods
Embryo collection and sample preparation
Mutation accumulation strains were donated by C. F. Baer from the University of Florida. The protocol for creating the strains has been described previously31. For our experiment, we used 19 mutation accumulation strains as well as the N2 ancestor strain. All strains were grown on nematode growth medium plates seeded with OP50 Escherichia coli bacteria, and kept at 20 °C. For embryo collections, we set our initial time to the division of the P1 cell (the four-cell stage). The rest of the embryos were collected at 60, 180, 270, 440 and 650 minutes after the P1 division. The last time-course stage was set to the hatched larva, at ~830 minutes after the P1 division for all strains. As a control, we collected samples in quadruplicates from the MA 522 mutation accumulation strain. Individual embryos were isolated and staged as previously described39. RNA from each embryo was prepared using TRIzol as previously described39 with 1 μl of the ERCC (External RNA Controls Consortium) spike-in kit40 (1:500,000 dilution) added with the TRIzol to each sample. During RNA extraction, for each strain, we pooled 10 staged embryos. Preparation of the sequencing library was performed using the CEL-Seq protocol41, with the addition of unique molecular identifiers to the reverse transcription primers42.

Sequencing
CEL-Seq libraries were sequenced on the Illumina Hi-Seq 2500. The sequencing data was de-multiplexed using the CEL-Seq pipeline41. Mapping of the reads used bowtie2 version 2.2.343, against C. elegans genome assembly WS230. Read counting used htseq-count version 0.5.3p1 defaults44, against WS230 annotation exons. We added an further correction to the read count based on the unique molecular identifiers, as described previously42. The counts were normalized by dividing by the total number of mapped reads for each gene and multiplying by 50,000, yielding the estimated gene expression levels in transcripts per 50 k.

Temporal ordering of gene expression
To organize gene expression temporally, we used our previously reported method32, which we refer to here as ZAVIT, ‘Z-score angle-sorted value index for temporal sorting’. ZAVIT temporally sorts gene expression profiles using principal component analysis on the standardized profiles. To standardize a gene expression profile, we subtracted the mean and divide by the standard deviation. Next, we studied the first two principal components, in which the genes form a circular-shaped cloud since the profiles were standardized. We then sorted the genes according to their angle from the origin in this space, by computing for each gene the inverse tangent.

Evolvability score
For our analysis, we selected the 5,673 genes whose expression fulfilled two criteria: (1) they were detected by at least one transcript in all 20 strains across the examined stages, and (2) they had a variance of expression among the top 70% of genes32. The evolvability score, ES, was calculated as follows. First, for each strain, we independently sorted genes using ZAVIT. Next, we temporally arranged gene expression for the mean of the 20 strains and for the mean of the four biological replicates. We calculated the difference between the temporal positions of each gene in each strain with the position of the gene in the mean of the 20 strains. Similarly, we calculated the difference between the temporal gene position in each replicate and the mean of the replicates. To reduce intrinsic noise in our experimental dataset, we subtracted the obtained replicate values from those values of the 20 strains, which provided ES. Using the ZAVIT-sorted mean profiles (across the 20 strains), we performed a sliding window analysis on the ES scores of the genes. Each window contained 201 genes, with a 100 gene overlap between adjacent windows. We used a Kolmogorov–Smirnov test to determine statistical significance, asking whether the mean ES for each cluster was significantly higher (divergent) or lower (conserved) than the mean ES of all genes in our analysis. To determine significance, we used a P-value threshold of 10−9.

Associating developmental stages for sliding windows
To associate a sliding window with an embryonic stage, we first extracted the 1,000 most expressed genes in each stage. We then tested for these genes enrichment in each sliding window cluster. Each sliding window cluster was assigned to a specific stage based the enrichment with the most stage-specific genes.

Gene set analysis
Lists of genes associated with particular Gene Ontology terms, transcription factors families and signalling pathways were retrieved from WormBase45. To remove redundant terms, we calculated the overlap between the different terms and removed those with over 0.6 similarity to another group. We set two more thresholds: first, we removed gene categories with <30 genes expressed during embryogenesis. Second, we restricted our analysis to dynamically expressed gene groups. To determine statistical significance, we used a Kolmogorov–Smirnov test with a P-value threshold of 0.05. Endoderm, ectoderm, mesoderm and integration genes lists were retrieved from previous work33.

Code availability
Analysis code was deposited to GitHub: https://github.com/harelzalts/MAphylotypic.

Data availability
Expression data were deposited to the Gene Expression Omnibus with accession number GSE87528.
