Overall, thus manuscript is of substantial interest, as it contributes to the debate over evolutionary forces maintaining CpG islands in mammalian genomes, including the human genome. The paper is clearly interesting. I have three comments:

1) The authors state that the rate of C > T transitions within CpG contexts is elevated 3–12 fold.

I believe that the effect is much stronger and of the order of 15 fold.

“Frequent cytosine methylation is usually considered as the main cause of a 3-12-fold excess of C > T substitutions in the CpG context [4–7] (estimates of de novo mutation rates have shown an up to 18-fold excess [8]), resulting in a significant underrepresentation of CpG dinucleotides in mammalian genomes, including the human genome [5, 6]”.

2) The methylation data come from mature sperm cells. The most relevant cell type is spermatocytes. More generally, methylation of all cell types in spermatogonia and oocyte lineages are relevant. I understand that there is nothing the authors can do about it. However, acknowledging this level of complexity warrants a separate longer discussion.

“What methylation data is appropriate for this study? Only germline mutations (mutations in gametes, zygotes, blastomeres, embryoblast cells, epiblast cells, primordial germ cells, and gametogonia) can be inherited, while somatic cell mutations cannot. Therefore, only the methylation patterns in former cell types are relevant to our study. Germline cells undergo many division cycles on the development path from zygotes to gametogonia, and therefore are likely to accumulate many mutations, including methylation-dependent CpG > TpG mutations. While somatic methylation itself should not affect observed substitution rates, although it can be correlated with mutation rates in regions where somatic and germline methylation profiles are similar [16, 17].

Consistent with previous views [18], a recent study confirmed that the number of mutations in human offspring is highly correlated with their fathers’ age [8], suggesting prevalent accumulation of mutations in the male germline. Also sperm cells demonstrate one of the highest methylation levels among the germline cells [17]. This makes sperm cells one of the most promising objects to study methylation-dependant substitution rates [17]. Fortunately, high quality methylation data are available for human sperm [9, 19, 20]. Spermatogonia cells would be an even better choice for the purpose of our study, since they constantly divide by mitosis during the entire male adult life accumulating a perceptible fraction of all germline mutations. Unfortunately, genome-wide methylation profiles of spermatogonia are currently unavailable. Oogonia methylation might also contribute to mutation rates, but such data is also unavailable. Oocytes have been shown to exhibit higher CGI methylation levels than sperm [20], but they do not undergo cell division and thus are not expected to acquire many mutations. Also, there is available data on methylation in embryonic stem cells (ESC), another type of germline cells undergoing many mitotic divisions [10]. Thus sperm and ESC data seem to be the most relevant available approximations of methylation patterns in the human germline.”

3) It would be great to extend this work to the analysis of allele frequency distribution. I understand that such analysis may be underpowered with currently available datasets. In a similar vein, growing datasets of de novo mutations offer a possibility to analyze de novo mutations directly as opposed to human chimpanzee divergence. Again, the author may find currently available datasets underpowered for such analysis.