Novel databases for molecular biology

SrR-Pabd has highlighted the need for
second-generation databases for molecular biology. One important task would
be to organize non-structural data into
accessible databases, which in itself would
justify a major collaborative effore.
Furthermore, structural information
should be accessible in the same conceptual framework as non-structural data.
Development of a uniform and coherent
conceptual framework could be based on
a systematic study of terms, concepts and
cognitive structures we use to perceive, to
interpret and to memorize macromolecular data.
The approach suggested here is based
on the analysis of scientific communications and statements pertinent to structural data. A preliminary- and by no means
impartial - survey of current papers on
protein and DNA structure suggests that
the conceptual machinery we use to
describe macromolecular data is in fact
simple and uniform.
For example, macromolecular structures, which are too complex to be
memorized, are recoded as a simplified set
of substructures related to each other by a
few relationships. The constituent elements are in turn characterized in terms of
size, composition and similarity to other
known substructures. The relationships of
elements are usually described as symmetries and vectorial distances. Primary
protein and DNA structures, for example,
seem to be translated into higher-order
sequences of complex elements (such as
cleavage sites or ligand-binding sites).
These segments can be described in different ways, as there are several symbolic
and parametric methods to represent
sequences.
Structures of DNA and protein can best
be visualized as hierarchical and colinear
data-structures (represented by sequences
of symbols, numbers or sub-files), on
which the same types of operations (such
as insertion, deletion, exchange, symmetry operations) can be defined.
Primary sequence similarity is by far the
most frequent tool for detecting and
characterizing structural similarities, even
though it is becoming apparent that distant homologies are more easily understood in terms of parametric representations'.
Even these simple concepts can be
highly efficient if used in a generalized
sense. For example, notions like a repetitive pattern of beta strands or
amphiphilic helices can both be described
as translational symmetries (in secondary
structure and in hydrophobicity, respectively). Similarly, the statement 'a hydrophobic helix flanked by ionic residues' can
be considered as a specific sequence of
three elements which are defined in terms
of composition. 
A generalized framework of concepts
and relationships abstracted from human
thinking could enormously increase the
performance of molecular-biology software. New categories identified by
computer-based methods could be introduced to complement the known substructures. For example, linguistic
methods have been used for the automatic
definition of characteristic subwords and
syntactic rules in DNA4
• Moreover, artificial intelligence methods could be built
up using these extended concepts, for
automatic analysis of the available structural data and for building up new structural databases. Novel database structures
could thus be the final result, rather than
the beginning of this process.
Interpretation of macromolecular data
seems to be ripe for artificial intelligence
methods. Highly accurate data are available in abundance; concepts and terms
used to describe these data are efficient
and can be unequivocally defined in
scientific terms; and our obvious inability
to obtain an adequate overview of the ever
growing body of information leaves us no
other alternative.  
