The use of structural profiles and parametric sequence comparison in the rational design of polypeptides

Introduction

"Protein engineering," i.e., the design and construction of novel or
mutated proteins, may involve different levels of structural information.
In the case of well-studied proteins the design can rely on a wealth of Xray, NMR, and chemical modification data. On the other hand, mutations
often have to be designed in cases when the amino acid sequence is the
only structural information available. For example, some proteins are not
readily available in quantities sufficient for structural analysis, and some
short peptides have no characteristic structures in solution. Mutated proteins, on the other hand, can now be obtained more and more readily due
to advances in recombinant DNA techniques, which make it possible to
test structural hypotheses in practice. If the goal is the exchange of a
single amino acid residue then the problem can be attacked by replacing
the residue in question with all the 19 remaining amino acids in parallel
mutagenesis experiments. On the other hand, this approach would be
clearly too expensive and time consuming if several residues of a region
have to be changed. The number of possibilities can be narrowed down if
a potentially important structural pattern, such as an amphiphilic a-helix,
can be recognized in the given region. In this case the mutations can be
rationally designed based on the hypothesis that those amino acid replacements leaving the original structural pattern intact are likely to be accepted. There are two generally used methods available for the recognition of local structures in amino acid sequences: (1) the use of symbolic
diagrams such as the Schiffer-Edmundson 1 "helical wheels" or the "helical nets," 2 and (2) the use of structural profiles.
This chapter briefly describes how the structural profiles are constructed and used. A particular goal of this chapter is to review the numeric and graphic methods developed for the comparative evaluation of
structural profiles. 3,4 The advantage of comparing structural profiles
rather than primary sequences originates from the simple fact that proM. Schiffer and A. B. Edmundson, Biophys. J. 7, 121 (1967).

files, unlike primary sequences, can be subjected to arithmetic operations
(averaging, subtraction, etc.) and their similarities can be characterized in
quantitative terms such as correlation coefficients and standard deviation.
This is essentially a parametric approach of sequence comparison which
makes it possible, e.g., to compare groups of sequences, to carry out a
semiquantitative comparison (ranking) of sequences in structural terms,
etc. These operations which are not feasible with primary sequences can
be easily programed on laboratory microcomputers and allow quantitative
characterization of the mutations planned. The molecular biologist can
use these techniques in two closely related areas: (1) comparison of mutated or "designed" sequences to their wild-type counterparts; (2) comparison of newly determined amino acid sequences to their known
homologs.
Principle and Scope
Structural profiles make it possible to compare wild-type and designed
sequences in quantitative terms. Average profiles and standard deviation
profiles calculated from homologous sequences allow identification of
conserved structural features that can help to formulate a structural hypothesis for the design of engineered analogs. The present chapter contains a compilation of the most important parameter sets used to construct
structural profiles from primary sequence data. Numeric and graphic
methods designed for the comparative evaluation of structural profiles are
described. The methods can be used for the simple quantitative evaluation (ranking) of sequences containing multiple amino acid replacements.
Definitions
The structural profile is one of the simplest representations of a protein structure. It is constructed by plotting a structural parameter Pi
against the sequential position i. The Pi structural parameters are obtained
either statistically, such as the Chou-Fasman parameters, 5 or by physical
measurement, such as the various hydrophobicity parameters. (Profile
representations of three-dimensional structures are not discussed here).
In the computational sense it is useful to divide the structural profiles
into two groups, single residue and multiple residue methods. In the single residue methods each of the 20 amino acids is characterized by a
constant structural parameter which is independent from the sequence. In
this case the profile is constructed simply by plotting these constant val5 p. y . Chou and G. M. Fasman, Adv. Enzymol. 47, 45 (1978).


ues against the sequential position. In the multiple residue methods the P/
parameters of the ith amino acid depends both on the ith amino acid and
on the sequential neighbors, and is calculated separately for every position in the sequence. For example, the algorithm of Garnier et al. 6 uses
contributions of the eight preceding and the eight subsequent sequential
neighbors for the calculation of the secondary structure propensity parameter of the ith amino acid [Eq. (3)].
For the presentation of the data, the plotted Pi parameters have to be
processed by curve smoothing that visualizes trends within the profiles by
removing dispersion. For our purposes basically any smoothing technique
is acceptable, and commercially available softwares usually contain such
options. In these procedures each Pi parameter is replaced by a new P'/
value which is an average calculated within a window, i.e., a sequential
environment of the ith residue. Usually, the window width is an optional
odd number (2k + 1) and the resulting average value is assigned to the
central position of the window. In the simplest case, P'i can be an arithmetic average [Eq. (la)] or a weighted arithmetic average [e.g., Eqs. (lb)
and (c)]:
j=i+k

P'i = [1/(2k + 1)] ~

ej

(la)

j=i-k

P'i = [17Pi + 12(Pi+l + Pi-O - 3(Pi+2 + Pi-2)]/35

(lb)

P'i = {7Pi + 312(Pi-1 + Pi+O + Pi-2 + Pi+2] - 2(Pi-3 + Pi+3)}/21 (lc)

More advanced methods can produce continuously differentiable
c u r v e s . 7-9 While the latter procedures more efficiently remove dispersion
than arithmetic averaging [Eq. (la)], they also distort the values numerically and may give rise to chain-end artifacts at the first and last residues.
Repeated use of the same algorithm also improves smoothing efficiency.
We note that (1) if the profiles are to be used for prediction, then the
optimized procedures recommended by the original papers have to be
employed (see below). (2) The unprocessed Pi parameters should be used
for numeric and graphic comparison of profiles as well as for the calculation of average and standard deviation profiles.
The different structural parameters (Table I) are usually scaled so as to
meet some statistical or other requirement. For better comparison and
6 F. Gamier, D. J. Osguthorpe, and B. Robson, J. Mol. Biol. 120, 97 (1978).
7 p. R. Bevington, " D a t a Reduction and Error Analysis for the Physical Sciences."
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1969.
s A. Savitzky and M. Golay, Anal. Chem. 36, 1627 (1974).
9 G. D. Rose, Nature (London) 272, 586 (1978).


uniformity, we have normalized the single residue amino acid parameter
sets to a mean 0 and a standard deviation 1 (Table II).
Description of Structural Profiles

Secondary Structure Propensity Profiles. The most widely used parameter set, that of Chou and Fasman, 5 is statistically derived from protein structures determined by X-ray crystallography. The parameters represent the propensity of each amino acid to form an a-helix, fl-sheet, or
turn (Table I). For example, the a-helix propensity parameter of an amino
acid a, Pa,~ is calculated by dividing the frequency of the amino acid a in
a-helix, f~,~ by the average frequency of residues in the helix conformation:
Pa,,~ = fa,,~/(f,~)

(2)

In their original paper Chou and Fasman used structural data on 15 proteins for the calculation of the conformational parameters. The ChouFasman parameters in Table I were calculated from a database containing
29 proteins. In the original method the profiles are smoothed with a fourresidue window, and the average value is assigned to the first position
within the window. Levitt 1° has published a Chou-Fasman type parameter set derived from a database of 60 protein structures.
The method of Chou and Fasman is a single residue method, in which
neighbor interactions are not included. Robson and co-workers developed
the so-called directional information algorithm, 6 a statistically based multiple residue method in which contributions from eight preceding and
eight subsequent sequential neighbors are included. For example, the
propensity of the ith amino acid to be in an a-helix, Pi,~ is calculated by
the following equation:
i+8

Pi,a --- Z IJ,a i-8

D~

(3)

where/j values are the contributions of the neighbors as well as of the ith
residue to the propensity value, taken from Table III for a-helix. There
are 20 x 17 P values for each of the four conformational states (a-helix,
fl-sheet, fl-turn, and coil, Tables III to VI). D~ is the so-called decision
constant which is selected from Table VII if the secondary structure
content of the protein is known from independent measurement. For
comparative purposes, unbiased profiles (D~ = 0, etc.) can be used.
Strongly predicted segments have P~ values of several hundred centinats.
ao M. Levitt, Biochemistry 18, 4277 (1978).

Structural parameters normalized to a mean 0 and a standard deviation 1.
b Key to column heads: (a) Chou-Fasman helical propensityS; (b) Chou-Fasman fl-sheet propensityS; (c) Chou-Fasman turn propensityS; (d) hydrophobicity according to Kyte and Doolittle~6;
(e) consensus hydrophobicity scale according to Eisenberg et al.22; (f) membrane-buried helical
potential according to Argos and PalautS; (g) membrane propensity scale according to Kuhn and
Leigh~9; (h) hydrophilicity scale according to Hopp and Woods22; (i) signal sequence helical
potential scale according to Von Heinje24; (j) signal sequence propensity scale according to Argos
and Palau~8; (k) side-chain bulkiness; (1) polarity.

Both the Chou-Fasman and the Robson profiles were originally designed for secondary structure prediction; for the details of prediction
methodology the reader is referred to the original papers. In addition,
both methods can be used for the predictive recognition of supersecondary structures as suggested by Taylor and Thornton.~l,I2 Super-secondary structures are sequentially linked pieces of secondary structures that
are in contact in three dimensions. The simple supersecondary structures
include the /3cq3 unit (found in the /3/c~ protein family), the /3-hairpin

a According to Gamier et al. 6
b These values have to be substituted into
Eq. (3). Decision constants for the turn and
coil conformations are equal to 0.

(/3-turn-/3 or/3 x t , frequently found in the all-/3 family), and the a x a
hairpin. An examination of 31 proteins showed that two-thirds of the
identified pieces of secondary structures were parts of such units, t3 The
principle is illustrated in Fig. I. For example, the fla/3 structure can be
recognized from a peak in the a-helix propensity profile flanked on both
sides by peaks in the/3-sheet profile. Naturally, not all supersecondary
structures may be clearly detectable from structural profiles; their importance lies in the fact that they represent interpretation of predictive data
(structural profiles) at a higher level of complexity (supersecondary structures).
Membrane Preference Profiles. Transmembrane segments in proteins
are characterized by a large number of nonpolar residues. Based on the
experimental data of Nazaki and Tanford TMand Wolfenden et al., 15 Kyte
and Doolittle ~6 developed a hydropathy scale that characterizes the hydrophobicity of the amino acid side chains. Nonpolar side chains have
large positive hydropathy parameters (Ile = 4.50), and polar ones are
assigned negative values (Arg = -4.50). Hydropathy profiles constructed
with these parameters and smoothed with a 19-residue window [Eq. (1),
k = 9], will display large positive peaks at membrane-bound segments.
Proteins located within the membranes are frequently characterized by a
series of transmembrane regions that appear in the graphs as positive
1~M. Levitt and C. Chotia, Nature (London) 261, 552 (1976).
14 T. Nozaki and C. Tanford, J. Biol. Chem. 246, 2211 (1971).
15 R. Wolfenden, L. Anderson, P. M. Cullis, and C. C. B. Southgate, Biochemistry 20, 849.
16j. Kyte and R. F. Doolitfle, J. Mol. Biol. 157, 105 (1982).

i.
FIG. 1. Schematic structural profiles representing two simple supersecondary structures,
the/3a/3 (A) and the fl-turn-fl units (B). A conserved/3-turn-/3 unit can be tentatively identified in Fig. 2 at the C-terminus of the ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase small subunit
polypeptide.

peaks interspersed by negative valleys corresponding to regions located
outside the membrane.
Several other hydrophobicity scales were developed. Tables I and II
include that of Eisenberg et al., ~7the "consensus hydrophobicity scale,"
which incorporates features of several other scales. We note that in our
applications differences between the various scales are negligible and that
the scale of Kyte and Doolittle 16 seems to have the widest acceptance by
molecular biologists.
Transmembrane segments are frequently helical. Argos and Palau developed a membrane-buried helix propensity scale, using statistical data
on 1125 residues) 8 Kuhn and Leigh developed another statistical membrane propensity scale, using structural data on 24 known transmembrane
segments, t9 The parameters range from - 2 . 8 (His) to 5.0 (Leu) and are
scaled so that a protein of average composition will have an average
membrane propensity of 0. The profiles are smoothed with a running
average algorithm [Eq. (la)], using a window width of 7. Eisenberg et al.
used a combination of hydrophobic moment profiles and hydrophobicity
profiles for the identification of transmembrane helices 2°-23 (see below).

Signal Sequence Helical Potential Profiles. Signal sequences are characterized by a stretch of nonpolar residues of high helix-forming propensity, and their amino acid composition significantly differs from the average protein composition. Von Heinje developed a helix hydrophobicity
scale based on the free energy required to transfer a membrane-bound
helix into solution. 24The parameters range from - 14.42 kJ/mol for Phe to
47.3 kJ/mol for Arg. In the profiles the helical part of the signal sequence
displays a negative trough. ,Argos et al. developed a signal sequence
helical propensity parameter set from a 705-residue database compiled
from signal sequences using Eq. (2). zs
The Hydrophilicity Profile: Prediction of Antigenic Determinants. Antigenic determinants of proteins are located on the surface of the molecule
and are frequently found in regions highly exposed to the solvent. This,
together with the fact that charged, hydrophilic amino acids are common
features of antigenic determinants led Hopp and Woods to use a hydrophilicity profile to locate antigenic determinants in a number of proteins. 26 Their hydrophilicity parameters are derived from the solvent parameters of Levitt. 27 These parameters are based on the same
experimental data as the hydrophobicity scales and indeed contain the
same information. In this scale hydrophilic amino acids have large positive parameters (Arg = 3.0) whereas hydrophobic residues have negative
ones (Trp = -3.4) (Table III). The hydrophilicity profiles are smoothed
by simple arithmetic averaging using a window width of 6 residues, and
the tentative antigenic regions are identified as those displaying the highest positive peaks. As peptide chain turns are often hydrophilic, 8 this
technique is likely to select turns as potential epitopes.
The Hydrophobic Moment Profile. Amphiphilic structures in proteins
and peptides are those in which hydrophobic and hydrophilic side chains
are separated on opposite sides. Amphiphilic structures are "surface
seeking"; i.e., they bind to membrane-solution surface boundaries. Amphiphilic segments of soluble proteins are frequently located on the protein surface with the hydrophilic side chains pointing toward the solution.
Amphiphilic structures in peptides can be easily recognized by diagramatic representations such as the Schiffer-Edmundson wheel diagrams l
(see Chap. [25], this volume). Graphic analysis of long sequences would
be cumbersome, however, so Eisenberg and co-workers developed a numeric method. 2°-23 The method is based on the concept of hydrophobic
24 G. Von Heinje, Eur. J. Biochem. 116, 419 (1981).
P. Argos, J. K. Mohana Rao, and P. A. Hargrave, Eur. J. Biochem. 128, 565 (1982).
26 T. Hopp and K. R. Woods, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 78, 3824.
27 M. Levitt, J. Mol. Biol. 104, 59 (1976).

moment, a numeric index of amphiphilicity defined by the following
equation:
~n =

/-/j sin(Sj)

+

Hj cos(Sj)

(4)

/-/j. is the hydrophobicity (Table I, column e) of the jth amino acid, 8 the
periodicity parameter (100 ° for a-helix and 180° for fl-sheet, expressed in
radians), and n is the total number of residues. ~n is a Fourier transform
type expression that has large values if residues of adverse hydrophobicity are clustered on opposite sides of the helix. Membrane-seeking amphiphilic helices can be located in protein sequences according to their
hydrophobic moment txn and average hydrophobicity, (/-/). IXn of amphiphilic helices is greater than 0.47 and (H) is in the range of -0.22 to
0.34. Transmembrane regions on the other hand have greater hydrophobicity values ((H) -> 0.68 for a 21-residue segment or ->1.10 for two
adjacent segments) and lower hydrophobic moments (~n < 0.3). 21
For the construction of the hydrophobic moment profile, the value of
I.Lnis calculated for a window of 21 residues, and its value is plotted at the
central position of the window:
([ i+,0

= .Lj:E ° m

sin(Sj)]2

[i~0

12,,/2

+ j+10 m cos(Sj)J )

(5)

The profile calculated with 8 = 100° gives maxima at amphiphilic helices;
amphiphilic r-sheets give peaks at 8 = 180°. A simple analysis of amphiphilicity can be carried out by plotting hydrophobicity (smoothed by
arithmetic averaging over a 21-residue window) and the hydrophobic moments for a-helix (8 = 100°) and B-sheet (8 = 180°) in the same coordinate
system. Finer-Moore and Stroud introduced a two-dimensional hydrophobic moment plot in which the sequential position i and 8 are the two
dimensions38 In this representation the amphiphilic segments appear as
"hills" at their respective 6 values.
Physical Parameters. Basically any physical parameter of the amino
acids could be used to construct a structural profile. The available softwares usually contain three of these, electric charge, side-chain bulkiness, and the polarity index (Tables I and II). The bulkiness parameter is
defined as the ratio of side-chain volume to length (in A2). 29 The polarity
index is proportional to the electric force (originating from charge and
dipole effects) due to an amino acid side chain acting on its immediate
28 j. Finer-Moore and R. M. Stroud, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 81, 155 (1984).
z9 j. M. Zirnmerman, N. Eliezer, and R. Simha, J. Theor. Biol. 21, 170 (1968).


surroundings. 29 These parameter sets can be useful if a newly derived
sequence is compared to its known homologs.
Average Profiles and Standard Deviation Profiles: Identification of
Structurally Conserved and Variable Regions 4
Average profiles can be used to identify structurally conserved regions
in homologous sequences such as members of a gene family. This feature
is especially useful when the degree of primary sequence homology is low
between the proteins in question. For the calculation of an average profile, the homologous sequences have to be aligned for maximum homology. The average profile of n aligned sequences is defined as

(Pi) = (~.~

(6)

The structural variability that exists among the sequences at a given sequential position can be characterized by standard deviation of the mean

(Pi)"
=

-

Pid)/n]

/ ( n - I)

(7)

The number n is not constant throughout the sequence; it includes only
those sequences in which the P; value is not missing because of an alignment gap. The (Pi) and the (r; profiles, defined by Eqs. (6) and (7), respectively, can be shown in the same coordinate system by one of the following methods: (I) The o-i profile is drawn symmetric to 0 as a shaded area
(---+triprofile). This makes it easy to identify regions where the (P;) profile is
significantly different from 0 (i.e., it is outside the shaded area, see Fig. 2).
(2) The tr; profile can be added symmetrically to the (Pi) profile as a
shaded area ((P;) - tr;profile). This makes it possible to compare an additional sequence to those included in the average. For example, a structural profile of a newly determined sequence can be visually compared to
a group of homologous sequences (presented as an average -+ standard
deviation profile) and segments identified where the new sequence is expected to be different from those already known (i.e., the profile is outside
the shaded area). Since the secondary structures are stabilized by shortrange interactions, regions displaying no conserved structural propensity
(P; < (r;) may be those stabilized by long-range interactions. These regions are likely to " a c c e p t " modifications without affecting biological
activity of the protein.
The use of average profiles is illustrated on the ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase small subunit (Rubisco SSU) gene family. 4 Figure 2
shows averaged a-helix, fl-sheet, and turn propensity profiles calculated

Fro. 2. Averaged a-helix (A), turn (B), and B-structure (C) propensity profiles calculated
from ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase small subunit sequences of five higher plants
(tobacco, spinach, petunia, soybean, and pea).4 Shaded areas indicate the standard deviation
(+Gi) of the respective structural parameter.


for six ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase small subunit proteins from
different higher plants. It follows from the probabilistic definition of the Pi
values that only those regions for which Pi > tri (i.e., the structure forming propensity is substantially different from 0) can be considered conserved in the structural sense. It appears that there are only a few regions
in which this condition is fulfilled; the rest of the protein has no characteristic structure forming potential. There are two plausible explanations for
this finding. First, the structurally determined regions, serving as folding
nuclei, may be sufficient for the formation of the native conformation. For
example, a conserved (Pi > o'i) fl-turn-fl supersecondary structure can be
tentatively identified in the C-terminal region. Second, external factors,
such as the large subunit of the enzyme, or long-range interactions may
contribute to the formation of the native conformation, so there may be
no rigid selectional constraints on the secondary structure forming propensity of the small subunit. Region 54-66 displays a pronounced fl-turn
forming propensity which is conserved in all the six sequences. However,
this region is entirely missing in two homologous proteins isolated from
prokaryotic organisms (the cyanobacteria Synechococcus R2 and Anabaena variabilis). In the higher plant genes this region is located near an
intron-exon junction. A comparison of the three-dimensional structures
of homologous eukaryotic and prokaryotic proteins has shown that intron-exon junctions in eukaryotic genes frequently coincide with loop
structures present on the surface of these proteins. 3° These "variable
surface loop" structures were implied to account for functional differences among prokaryotic and eukaryotic members of a gene family. The
strong turn forming potential of region 54-66 is in fact consistent with a
surface loop structure, which may explain functional differences between
higher plant and cyanobacterial Rubisco SSUs.
Comparison of Structural Profiles 3,4
Homology of proteins has been studied at various levels of structural
organization. Comparison of gene sequences at the DNA or amino acid
level provides quantitative measures of homology which is essential for
establishing phylogenetic relationships. Comparison of three:dimensional
structures makes it possible to reveal similarities between proteins that
are not demonstrably homologous in their primary structure. Comparison
of structural profiles is essentially a parametric approach to the analysis of
sequence homology that has several advantages over the comparison of
3o C. S. Craik, W. J. Rutter, and R. Fletterick, Science 220, 1125 (1983).
3t R. M. Sweet and D. Eisenberg, J. Mol. Biol. 171, 479 (1983).


primary sequences. First, it makes it possible to describe sequence differences in terms of protein structure. For example one can rank homologous sequences according to a structural parameter (average helicity,
hydrophobicity, hydrophobic moment, etc.) and then correlate biological
activity with the structural parameter in question. Second, the use of
average and standard deviation profiles makes it possible to compare
groups of sequences, which is not possible through primary sequence
comparison. For example, one can answer questions whether a newly
determined protein sequence is within the range of the known homologous sequences in terms of secondary structure, hydrophobicity, etc.
Also, the expected structural differences can be located and characterized. Third, the numeric indices described below allow optimization of
sequence alignment in equivocal cases.
Before structural profiles are compared, the two sequences have to be
aligned for maximum homology by introducing gaps at appropriate positions. Similarly, gaps should be introduced into the calculated structural
profiles at the same positions so as to maintain homology. As a rule,
positions where one of the residues is missing due to an alignment gap are
omitted from the further calculations.
Graphic Comparison. If Pi, l and Pi,2 denote structural parameters of
the ith residue in sequences 1 and 2, respectively, then the difference
profile can be written as
APi = Pi.2 -- Pi,l

(8)

and plotted against the sequential position i. Difference plots give a zero
baseline for completely homologous regions. Regions that are different in
the two sequences will give peaks or valleys, depending on the sign of the
difference. The difference profiles are usually scattered graphs that need
to be smoothed for data presentation. Quantitative evaluation of APi is
meaningful only on a comparative basis. Such an evaluation is possible if
a profile (Pi,2) is compared to an average profile (Pi, O calculated from
known homologs with a standard deviation o-i. In this case cri can be
considered as a measure of "acceptable" variability and Ap~ should substantially exceed cri for structural differences to be predicted in a given
region.
The difference plots shown in Fig. 3 were calculated between c~-helix
and/3-sheet propensity profiles of Rubisco SSU from the prokaryote Synechococcus R2 (Pi, l), with the average of six higher plant Rubisco SSU
proteins (Pi,2). 3 The figure shows the N-terminal part of the APi profile and
the +_tr~profile which characterizes the variability of the plant sequences.
In this region, the Synechococcus R2 protein seems to have a higher
t~-helix forming potential (Ap~,~ > 0) whereas the higher plant proteins

FIG. 3. a-Helix and B-structure propensity difference profiles comparing the N-terminal
region of the Synechococcus R2 ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase small subunit [Pi.2 in
Eq. (8)] to the average profile [Pjj in Eq. (8)] of five membrane-translocated ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase small subunit sequences (from tobacco, spinach, petunia, soybean,
and pea).

seem to have a greater tendency to form fl-structures at the N-terminus
(APi, a < 0). Rubisco SSU is a membrane-translocated protein in higher
plants that is synthesized with a transit peptide whereas its prokaryotic
counterparts are cytoplasmic proteins. The finding is thus in accordance
with the known propensity of membrane-translocated proteins to form/3structures at their N-termini.
Numeric Comparison. The concept of using correlation coefficients to
compare structural profiles was developed overall similarities in hydrophobicity 3° and secondary structure. 3,4 With the terminology introduced
at Eq. (8) the correlation coefficient calculated between two structural
profiles can be written as follows:

E Pi,tPi,z
R = (~ Pi, 2Pia2),/2

(9)

R is equal to I for two identical sequences, R approximates for two
unrelated sequences, and R approaches - 1 if the structural profiles are
anticorrelated. The z-test of Fisher can be used as a test of significance, n
i.e., to establish if R is significantly different from 0. To meet the criteria
of the z-test, the structural parameters were normalized to mean 0 and
32 C. M. Goulden, "Methods in Statistical Analysis," 2nd Ed., p. 122. Wiley, New York,
1952.

standard deviation 1. The rescaled structural parameters are summarized
in Table I. If the original (not normalized) structural parameters are used
to calculate correlation coefficients, the results can be erroneous. For
example, the average of the Chou-Fasman parameters is 1 (i.e., >0), so
sequences of similar composition are likely to give high correlation coefficients in the absence of any structural similarity if these parameters are
used for the calculation of Eq. (9) without normalization. Several authors
use the following formula for calculating correlation coefficients from
nonnormalized parameters:
R =

Y. ([P/,1

-

(Pi,I)][ei,2

-

(ei,2)])

(10)

( E [Pi, I - (Pi,1)]2[P,,2 - (Pi,2)]2) ''z

where (Pi, t) and (Pi,2) are mean values calculated in the sequential region
included in the summation.
The correlation coefficient can be used as an indicator of structural
similarity. The procedure is illustrated on synthetic peptide analogs that
have known differences in secondary structure as compared to their natural counterparts. 33 The synthetic peptides were designed so as to have the
following characteristics relative to the corresponding natural peptides:
(1) equal or increased helix content; (2) conserved charged residues and
hydrophobic/hydrophilic balance; (3) low (20-50%) primary sequence
homology.
Melittin is a 26-residue hemolytic peptide with a segment that has the
potential to form an amphiphilic helix. When the sequence of the amphiphilic segment was rearranged according to the above criteria, a biologically active analog was obtained that was higher in a-helix content
(35%) than the native melittin (18%) as determined by circular dichroism. 34 Structural correlation values listed in Table VIII reflect the differences in a-helix formation: The value of the a-helix correlation R~ is the
lowest among all values compared. The correlation coefficient can also be
used to rank sequences according to their expected structural similarity.
For example, analogs of fl-endorphin representing a range of a-helix content were correctly ranked using R~ alone. 35 The correlation coefficient is
an index of variability and gives no information about the direction of the
difference (this can be established from a difference plot). Finally we
mention that the structural correlation coefficient can also be used to
describe evolutionary changes in protein secondary structure. 3
There are two other numeric indices that allow quick evaluation of

" Sequences~4: Melittin, G I G A V L K V L
T T G L P A L I S W I K R K R Q Q: Synthetic analog, L L Q S L L S L L Q S L L S L L L
QWLKRKRQQ.
b R values given were calculated by using Eq.
(9) (P1, melittin; P:, synthetic analog). R values above 0.40 are significant at the 99.99%
level.

multiple amino acid replacements in shorter segments: (1) (AP;) is the
average difference (sum of the APi values calculated between the two
sequences divided by the number of residues in the segment and (2)
<laP/l>, the average absolute difference (APi) is the average value of the
difference profile, i.e., it contains the same information. (lAP/l) is an
indicator of variability. The use of these indices is illustrated in Ref. 4.
Computer Programs
Sequence management programs used in most molecular biology laboratories (for reviews, see Ref. 36 and F. Lewitter and W. Rindone, Vol.
155 [36]) are generally capable of drawing structural profiles from primary
sequence data, even though they may not contain all parameter sets summarized in this chapter. Averaging of profiles is feasible in some computer
programs (e.g., Ref. 37), but the features crucial for engineering applications (standard deviation profiles and the numeric indices of structural

comparison) are not standard options in the generally used molecular
biology softwares. These capabilities can be either incorporated into separate programs (such as the protein sequence evaluation package developed by the author4), or integrated into available sequence management
programs. The design of the programs should make it possible to carry out
any combination of the numeric and graphic procedures outlined above. It
is also recommended that segments of sequences could be separately
analyzed. Curve smoothing and graphic output can be performed by commercially available microcomputer software.
Comments: Evaluation of the Results
Since engineering of a protein segment can have a variety of goals
(e.g., reinforcement or disruption of structural elements, removal of sites
for enzymatic or chemical attack), there are no generally applicable rules
for the evaluation of the results. In most cases the problem itself defines
the solution, and the experimenter can simply select the most promising
replacement alternatives, using the numeric and graphic methods outlined
here. General guidelines can be given, however, for two experimental
situations: (1) The sequence to be redesigned has no known homologs. In
this case it is recommended to carry out secondary structure prediction
and to draw helical wheel and helical net diagrams for the segment of
interest. On this basis one might be able to recognize a structural motif
(e.g., Fig. 1) which makes it possible to formulate a structural hypothesis
for amino acid replacements. Then the sequences containing the proposed
alterations can be ranked in computer experiments using the methods
presented here. (2) If the sequence to be redesigned has several known
homologs (with differences in their primary sequence) then average profiles and standard deviation profiles can be constructed with the parameters thought to be important in protein folding, i.e., secondary structure
propensities, hydrophobicity, polarity, and side-chain bulkiness. Through
visual comparison of the profiles it can then be established which of these
properties is the most conserved within the group. (For the comparison
between the parameters, the normalized parameter sets summarized in
Table II have to be used.)
Additional information can be obtained from the predicted secondary
structure of the individual sequences as well as from averaged predictions. 6'36 As an example, Fig. 4A shows the primary sequence of transit
peptides that mediate passage into the chloroplasts of proteins synthesized in the cytoplasm. Although chloroplasts of higher plants reciprocally recognize each other's transit peptides, the primary sequences show
little homology. On the other hand, the predicted secondary structures


FIG. 4. Amino acid sequence (A) and predicted secondary structure (B) of transit peptides that mediate the posttranslational transport of precursor proteins into the chloroplast. 4
Chl ABS0, chlorophyll a/b binding polypeptide; SS, ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase
small subunit transit peptide. Method was by Gamier et al. (unbiased prediction). 6


FIG. 5. Helical wheel representation of the N-termini of two chloroplast transit peptides.
The hydroxyamino acids are boxed (abbreviations are as in Fig. 4).


show a distinct similarity: they all contain an a-helix at the N-terminus
followed by a repetitive pattern of fl-strands (Fig. 4B). In addition, the
helical wheel diagrams shown in Fig. 5 show that the hydroxyamino
acids, serine and threonine, seem to form asymmetric clusters on the Nterminal helices. Naturally, these and similar findings are only hypothetical and need experimental confirmation. On the other hand, they can
provide a rational framework for experimental design and thereby reduce
the number of directed mutagenesis experiments necessary for obtaining
biologically active protein analogs.

By JOHN W. TAYLOR and E, T. KAISER
In recent years, a large number of intermediate-sized biologically active peptides have been identified and their amino acid sequences determined. Unless they contain multiple disulfide linkages, these peptides
usually do not form very stable secondary or tertiary structures in aqueous solution. However, they often have the potential to form segments of
amphiphilic secondary structures that might be induced on binding to a
matching amphiphilic environment provided by the biological interfaces
at which their activities are expressed. 1,2 Understanding structure-function relationships in such peptides requires the identification of these
potential structures and rigorous testing of their importance.
A variety of peptides, including serum apolipoproteins,3,4 toxins, 5-7
chemotactic factors,8 and peptide hormones,9-~2 contain segments of their
