DOMON: an ancient extracellular domain in dopamine β-monooxygenase and other proteins

Abstract
A previously uncharacterized 110–125 residue-long domain was identified both in the physiologically important enzyme dopamine β-monooxygenase and in several other secreted and transmembrane proteins such as SDR2 and CG-6. This domain was predicted to adopt an all-β fold with seven or eight strands and might function as a module mediating a range of extracellular adhesive interactions.

Keywords
extracellular adhesiondopamine β-monooxygenasedomain shuffling

Keywords
Structural biologyBiochemistryCell biology

Many eukaryotic cell-surface and secreted proteins show modular architectures with tandem arrays of distinct conserved domains 1. Specifically, a great diversity of domain architectures is seen in the surface receptors and extracellular matrix proteins of multicellular organisms, which appears to have been generated through the evolutionary processes of duplication, domain shuffling and gene fusion 1, 2, 3, 4. Identification of the conserved modules in these extracellular proteins has significantly aided our understanding of the complexities of cell-adhesion and receptor–ligand contacts 1. Here, I report a previously uncharacterized module found in diverse extracellular proteins from both plants and animals that might play a role in the adhesive interactions of these proteins.

Characterization of the DOMON domain
In an attempt to detect as yet uncharacterized extracellular domains, I examined conserved regions of secreted and surface proteins that did not map to previously known domains. One such region was detected in the well-studied protein dopamine β-monooxygenase (DM) that, in mammals, is involved in the conversion of dopamine to the catecholamine noradrenaline – a crucial physiological modulator of the sympathetic nervous system, T-cell-mediated immunity and fetal development 5, 6. In insects, an orthologous enzyme is needed for the biosynthesis of the neurotransmitter octopamine from tyramine 7. This conserved region comprises ∼115 residues (region 43–158) and occurs N-terminal to the two Cu-ascorbate dependent monooxygenase domains that form the catalytic part of the enzyme 8. To detect all the occurrences of this region, I used the corresponding region of human DM in a PSI-BLAST search 9 of the non-redundant database with an inclusion threshold of 0.01. This search initially recovered the various orthologs and paralogs of DMs from various animals and, in subsequent iterations, recovered several other proteins with statistically significant e-values (Fig. 1). These included a variety of secreted and surface proteins such as SDR2 (Mus musculus) 10 expressed in kidney, CG-6 (Homo sapiens) expressed in the brain 11, PAR (Botryllus schlosseri) 12 and the uncharacterized proteins C09F9.2 (Caenorhabditis elegans) and MBG8.9 (Arabidopsis thaliana). All these proteins contained 1–4 repeats of this region. Reciprocal searches with the same region from the newly detected proteins retrieved the original seed queries and the same set of proteins without any false positives. This indicated that the conserved 110–125 residue-long region occurring in diverse contexts was a distinct, previously uncharacterized, evolutionarily mobile domain. I named this region the Domon domain after pamine β-nooxygenase -terminal domain.

A multiple alignment of the domain was constructed using the ClustalW program 13, in conjunction with manual adjustments based on the PSI-BLAST pair-wise alignments, and its secondary structure was predicted using the PHD program 14. The sequence conservation is predominantly centered around patches of hydrophobic residues and there is a characteristic motif with two small positions (Gly or Ser) corresponding to a conserved turn immediately C-terminal to strand 3 (Fig. 1). The secondary structure prediction points to an all-β-strand fold with seven or eight core strands supported by a buried core of conserved hydrophobic residues (Fig. 1). This suggests that the Domon domain might form a β-sandwich structure, with the strands distributed into two β sheets as is seen in many extracellular adhesion domains such as the immunoglobulin, FNIII (fibronectin type III), cadherin and PKD (polycystic kidney disease) domains 15. The poorly conserved exposed loops between the strands are likely to mediate the specific interactions of this domain.

Putative role of the DOMON domain
The architectures of the Domon domain proteins strongly suggest a function in extracellular adhesion (Fig. 2). The fusion of the Domon domain to catalytic domains in DM and its orthologs is reminiscent of the similar fusion of adhesion modules to secreted enzymes such as proteases and transglutaminases. DM has been shown to exist both as a soluble tetramer, and as signal-peptide-dependent and independent membrane-associated forms 16. The Domon domain might be needed for either the non-covalent tetramerization of DM or for interactions between DM and specific proteins in the secretion-associated complexes in neurons or chromaffin granules. Another interesting, unexplored possibility is the role of the Domon domain in tethering the soluble DM activity to specific cellular surfaces, where it could catalyze local synthesis of catecholamines.

All other Domon-containing proteins have one or more extracellular copies of this domain, often fused to other well-known adhesion-related domains, suggesting that they act as cell-surface receptors (Fig. 2). Of these, the human CG-6 protein is encoded by a gene on chromosome 9 from the familial dysautonomia candidate region and is strongly expressed in the brain 11. This protein contains a single Domon domain with a hydrophobic segment at the extreme C-terminus, suggesting that it is a GPI-linked membrane-anchored protein. Mouse SDR2, which was identified as a kidney-specific surface protein 10, combines the Domon domain with an N-terminal Reelin domain and a specific conserved C-terminal six transmembrane domain (Fig. 2). Related architectures in which 2–4 Domon domains are combined with a homologous six transmembrane domain are seen not only in animals but also in plants (Fig. 1, Fig. 2). These proteins are some of the few receptor-like molecules that share not only conserved domains but also specific architectural features between plants and animals. Thus, unlike most receptor and extracellular matrix protein domains that were invented or recruited after the rise of multicellularity in different branches of the eukaryotic crown group 3, Domon was already functioning in this capacity in their common ancestor.

The identification of the Domon module could aid further experimental investigations of hitherto unexpected interactions of the important animal enzyme, dopamine β-monooxygenase, as well as those of a variety of other receptor-like molecules.