Road Map to Study Convergent Evolution: A Proposition for Evolutionary Systems Biology Approaches

Abstract
Every evolutionary biologist will surely acknowledge that convergent evolution, the independent evolution of similar features in different evolutionary lineages, is an important phenomenon of the organic evolution. However, the concept is complex and can have several related but conceptually distinct meanings in the literature, including parallel evolution (independent mutations in orthologous genes) and homoplasy (any convergent traits, including reversion). Some authors, for example, use the term “parallel evolution” differently from “convergent evolution”, and they reserve the latter term for more “unlikely” (or “more independent”) examples of phenotypic similarity across lineages, those not predisposed by genomic similarity. Semantic arguments in science are often fruitful, but can also prevent efficient scientific exchanges in the field. Hence, the goal of this article was (1) to define convergent evolution in a better way by applying a multilevel biological-level approach and (2) to propose a road map to help researchers navigate their routes in studying this phenomenon.

State of the art including new concepts needed to better understand this phenomenon
In order to add depth and (we hope) some clarity to the conceptual understanding of evolutionary convergence, it is important to describe the following aspects: at the phenotype level, to distinguish isoconvergent/alloconvergent evolution (see text below), species global convergence versus character convergence (multivariate convergence vs single trait convergence) and identify what is the type of character that has evolved, whether it is morphology versus physiology, for instance, and whether it is a continuous or discrete character.

We argue here that it is essential to first characterize phenotype-level convergence, before defining convergence at other levels. Indeed, once the phenomenon at the phenotypic level is clearly described, one can define the phenomenon at other biological levels in cases where the different biological levels are linked, and address the question about the origins of the genetic changes de novo versus the pre-existing ones and the consequences of the genetic variation at the coding, epigenetic, transcriptional and higher biological level.

1.1 Concept, Definition: Convergence at Phenotypic Level
1A)
Iso- versus Alloconvergent evolution

 
We start this section with a short epistemologic analysis about the use of the term parallel and convergent evolution in the literature. The term “convergent evolution” is generally used in the following way: «Convergent evolution : the independent evolution of similar features in different evolutionary lineages» (Losos 2011). However, the convergent evolution of a given character can result from the evolution of a similar or a different character.

The distinction, using the ancestral state information, is found in some of the molecular phylogeny analyses, under the term of parallel and convergent evolution (Zhang and Kumar 1997). Here, the term “parallel evolution” is used if the ancestral amino acid is the same, and “convergent evolution” is used if the ancestral amino acid is different.

However, most of the time, when convergent evolution is found at the phenotype level, the distinction between parallel and convergent evolution is not based on the evolutionary history of the characters, but on the similarity of the genetic mechanisms that are involved in the repeated phenotype. If the molecular mechanisms are the same, the evolution is said to be parallel; if the genetic mechanisms are different, the evolution is said to be convergent (see, for example, Rosenblum et al. 2014). Some authors use also the phylogenetic proximity; when the species are phylogenetically close, the term “parallel evolution ” is used; when they are phylogenetically distant, they use the term “convergent evolution”. This makes sense, regarding the above use of both terms, since closest species will tend to evolve using the same mechanisms, either because the variation that underlines the phenotype variation corresponds to the standing variation (Elmer and Meyer 2011), or because of the interaction between the different genes of the genome (or epistasis). With a similar background, more similar fixation of substitutions are excepted but if the interactions are different between the genes, it is likely that the evolutionary trajectory will be different (for a great example, see Ujvari et al. 2015).

In order to help in the conceptual understanding of evolutionary convergence, we propose two neologisms that can be applied to all the biological levels: isoconvergent and alloconvergent evolution (iso from the same ancestral state and allo from a different ancestral state). This distinction is not done at the phenotype level in the literature (Conway Morris 2003; McGee 2011; Losos 2011; Gordon et al. 2015). However, it has to be noted that scientists who work at the genetic level, when talking about convergent evolution at the phenotype level, intuitively mean isoconvergence at the phenotype level (see Fig. 1.1 in Martin and Orgozozo 2013; Rosenblum 2014). As an illustration, this is what Rosenblum et al. wrote (2014) in a chapter called Linking phenotype and phylogeny: “Before investigating the molecular mechanisms of convergence, researchers must first ensure that the phenotype of interest is convergent. Researchers should define convergent evolution in a phylogenetic context. This requires an explicit integration of phenotypic data with a molecular phylogeny, and should incorporate uncertainty in the phylogeny and the model. For example, the independent evolution of similar phenotypes can be identified from ancestral state reconstruction, comparisons of phylogenetic and genetic distance, or inferred shared selective regime (e.g. Muschick et al. 2012; Ingram and Mahler 2013)”. Here, Rosenblum et al. used the word “convergent evolution” of a phenotype, but they mean, in our terms, isoconvergent evolution of a phenotype.

Thus, either the distinction is not noted, or the authors (mainly the authors interested by the genetic mechanisms) when discussing about convergent evolution think about “isoconvergent evolution ” implicitly. In our view, it is, however, important to explicitly make the distinction between iso- and alloconvergence at the phenotype level as, above all, this will allow testing further the relationship between isoconvergent evolution at the phenotypic level and isoconvergence at other biological levels (Stern and Orgozozo 2008). If this is the case, isoconvergent evolution of a phenotypic level can be used to decipher biological mechanisms at the genetic, epigenetic, transcriptional and other biological levels (Kopp 2009).

A key example: biochemical/enzymatical function
Alloconvergent evolution of enzyme function can be seen in two distinct, but sometimes joint, effects. The first is when non-homologous enzymes deliver the same transformation, as expressed by the same four-digit enzyme commission (EC) number. These enzymes are named transformational analogues. The second situation is when the same (same four-digit EC) or related (same three-digit EC) enzyme transformation is effected by a similar disposition of residues in the active site, as exemplified in the Ser-His-Asp catalytic triad shared by the trypsin family and subtilisin. Such enzymes are mechanistic analogues. These two situations are not exclusive because two enzymes are assigned to both classes if they perform exactly the same overall reaction with the same mechanism (Doolittle 1994; Gherardini et al. 2007).

The transformational analogues evolved at the protein level from different ancestors via divergent evolution as the transformational function evolved likely from different ancestral transformational functions, and these functions evolved therefore in an alloconvergent manner (see, for an example, the case of b lactamase B, Alderson et al. 2014).

In the case of enzymatic isoconvergent evolution, the same function is present in the ancestor (see, for example, Dick et al. 2012).
1B)
Assumption of “convergent evolution” via adaptation to a new environment

 
Another aspect of the definition of convergent evolution is that some authors have no assumption concerning the evolutionary driving force, while others see the action of the adaptive evolution. Convergent evolution , defined as being the result of adaptive evolution, is commonly used in the literature as synthesized by Stayton (2015). A scientific approach should be first to evidence convergent evolution and then test for adaptation or any other phenomenon such as constraint or evolutionary relaxation (Arbuckle et al. 2014). Indeed, in many articles, the convergence at the phenotype level is suspected by the fact that the species that live in the same environment will be adapted to it in the same manner and will have the same phenotypic response, and the case of the marine mammals is one of the examples (Foote et al. 2015; McGowen et al. 2014; Mirceta et al. 2013). Furthermore, many examples are found in the case of “parallel speciation” for species that are close phylogenetically (this is why the term parallel is used for different populations of the same species; Jones et al. 2012; Elmer and Meyer 2011; Soria-Carrasco et al. 2014). It should be noted that in these species the genetic origin of the convergence could be due to the standing variation or hybridization.
1C)
Convergence at the character or the organism levels

 
The definition of convergence can be based on specific traits (see, for example, Pankey et al. 2014) or based on the total organism: global similarities based on several characters (see, for example, Losos et al. 2011; Malher et al. 2013).

1.2 Road Map
1.2.1 Re-analyses of Known Cases and Analyses of New Cases of Convergent Evolution at the Phenotypic and Environmental Level
Concerning these three points, our proposition is to re-analyse the described and new cases on a phylogenetic basis and to extract on one side the cases corresponding to isoconvergent evolution and on the other those corresponding to alloconvergence.

1.2.1.1 Bibliographic Analysis and Research of Undescribed Cases
Research of known cases
This is the strategy we propose for the research of known cases. Research can be done on the ISI database (http://www.webofknowledge.com/) using convergent* AND evolution* keywords. In order to complete this search, several books can be used: the McGhee (2011), the Conway Morris (2003) and the Sanderson and Hufford (1996), but also the website dedicated to the convergent evolution and coordinated by Conway Morris, i.e. map of life at http://www.mapoflife.org/, the Wikipedia site at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_examples_of_convergent_evolution, as well as the compilation realized by Connie Barlow at www.thegreatstory.org/convergence.pdf. General reviews like that of Gordon and Notar (2015) will also be used.

Research of new cases
Following the strategy previously proposed by Hiller et al. (2012), one can perform a systematic search for all the characters of a phylogenetic group and find one or several characters that have a paraphylogenetic distribution; in other words, to map all the characters on a phylogenetic tree and decipher the character that evolves in an independent manner. A database on phenotypes in the context of the phylogeny already exists: the morphobank, and is available online at http://www.morphobank.org/ (O’Leary and Kaufman 2011).

Habitat shift convergence
The search can be done by screening the ISI database using the key words convergent* AND environment* or, in an indirect manner, convergent* evolution and adaptation*. We can perform analysis showing the paraphyletic environmental distribution for a given clade, for example the aquatic way of life of mammals. At this stage, it is important to define the environment; an international effort is on the way (Buttigieg et al. 2013).

1.2.1.2 Definition of the Phenotype
Functional level, morphological level, distinction between discrete and continuous characters. Character convergence/Global convergence.

We now consider the different levels of biological organization to which convergence concepts can be applied. At the physiological level, one can distinguish different sublevels: biochemical (metabolism), electrophysiological, mechanical and physical. It is important to add here another level: the one of the environmental demand and the possibility that different solutions can be found to face the same problem. One of the classical examples is predators that confront prey containing toxic substances and may either evolve resistance or avoid eating the part of the body that contains the toxin. It should also be noted that very different morphologies may produce similar functional capabilities. For example, labrid fish with many different jaw structures can produce the same suction force (Alfaro et al. 2005).

Further, a physiological character can be linked to several morphological traits. For example, talking about ultrasonic detection, the deformation of the cochlea is isoconvergent in the ultrasonic hearing lineage but bats have external ears that allow amplifying the signal which is not the case for the dolphins. A given function or physiology can also be the addition of several functions. The example of echolocation is a good one as it corresponds in fact to the addition of several different functions, and it is important to dissect the functions and then look if each function (subfunction) is supported by one or several morphological characters.

Once the character is defined, we then have to classify the cases as isoconvergence or alloconvergence. In the case of alloconvergence, because the character under investigation occurred in an independent manner, it can be used for statistical analysis as an independent observation and link, for example, to other parameters such as environment. However, the link with the other biological levels cannot be done (see above). In the case of isoconvergent evolution, many tests can be done (see after); furthermore, the link with the other biological levels can be investigated, and this will be discussed in the following paragraph.

1.2.1.3 Isoconvergence Detection and Test
Methods have been developed for both discrete and continuous traits in the case of isoconvergent evolution with well-defined characters.

Discrete Characters, Character per Character at the Phenotype Level
Identifying isoconvergence starts by an ancestral state reconstruction of the isoconvergent trait. For example, this method has provided support for isoconvergent evolution of plumage coloration in Icterus orioles (Omland and Lanyon 2000) and the origin of photosphores in squids (Pankey et al. 2014). In such an analysis, the phenotype is reconstructed over the phylogeny, and independent origins are taken as an evidence of isoconvergence.

Continuous Trait at Phenotype Level
Most of the time this approach is used for multicharacter traits to test isoconvergent evolution at the global (species) level, but it can also be used for a simple character trait, biochemical activity, for example.

Detection of the isoconvergent evolution
A first approach has been developed by Muschick et al. (2012) that used a phenotype approach to test for convergence in cichlid fishes by considering that convergence should result in a pattern of reduced phenotypic differentiation when compared with phylogenetic distance. They calculated Euclidean distances between species for the morphological traits of interest and plotted them against the phylogenetic distances. They then used simulations to identify instances where phenotypic divergence was significantly lower than expected, based on phylogenetic distance.

A second approach was described by Ingram and Mahler (2013), which explicitly modelled trait evolution onto a phylogeny to identify convergent evolution. Their method (called SURFACE) takes a continuous trait and fits Ornstein–Uhlenbeck models, with varying numbers of selective regimes and with shifts at varying points on the tree. Akaike’s information criterion is then used to select the best fitting model. Convergence is identified by the independent adoption of the same similar shift at multiple points on the phylogeny. This method represents a technique to identify when convergence has occurred.

Test to evidence whether we have more isoconvergence than expected
In order to quantify the strength of isoconvergence, Arbuckle et al. (2014) developed an index (Wheatsheaf) that quantifies the strength of convergence as the ratio of the average pairwise distance between all the taxa in the dataset to the average pairwise distance between all putatively convergent taxa. This kind of analysis is done usually for a group of characters in order to test a global convergence (see Malher et al. 2013; Moen et al. 2016 and for a review Stayton 2015).

1.2.2 Isoconvergence: Link Between the Different Biological Levels: From the Genotype to the Phenotype
Because it is possible that isoconvergence at the phenotype level could be linked to similar mechanisms at other biological levels (multilevel isoconvergence), it is important to show here how the different biological levels are linked; this is described in the following paragraph (Fig. 1.2).

1.2.2.1 Genetics/Epigenetics Mechanism Linking the Genotype to the Phenotype
The causative mutation for a phenotypic shift should be found at the DNA level: point mutation, indel deletion, horizontal gene transfer, at the coding level or non-coding level (repetitive element, non-coding RNA, micro RNA…). At the non-coding level, the consequence of a mutation can be at epigenetic and transcriptional level (Lynch et al. 2015). To better analyse the consequence of the mutation in the broader context of convergent evolution, we argue that it is important to have a network view instead of a gene-centred view (as genes do not work in isolation).

The most integrative way to understand the role of the different genes and corresponding networks of genes in development and in the relation “phenotype to genotype” is given by the work of Davidson and collaborators in seminal papers on gene regulatory network (GRN) and differentiation gene battery (DGB) . The GRN shows a hierarchical organization. The GRNs establishing this initial postgastrular regulatory state, including the signalling interactions that help to establish domain boundaries, could be termed GRN level 1 (GRN1). The progenitor fields for the future adult body parts are later demarcated by signals plus local regulatory spatial information, and given regulatory states are established in each such field by the earliest body part-specific GRNs. Many such progenitor fields are thus set up during postgastrular embryogenesis. This corresponds to the second hierarchical level 2 (GRN2). Each progenitor field is then divided up into the subparts that will together constitute the body part, where the subdivisions are initially defined by installation of unique GRNs producing unique regulatory state GRN 3. The next-level termination of the developmental process in each region of the late embryo, the GRNs specifying the several individual cell types and deployed in each subpart of each body part, is the level 4. These GRNs control the expression of differentiation gene batteries, the final outputs of each cell type.

The evolution of forms or the apparition of a new structure is a developmental process that can be due to a neo-expression of the GRN levels 1, 2, 3. The apparition of a new cell type can be due to the neo-expression of GRN but at different levels 3 and 4 as well as from the neo-expression of the differentiation gene battery (due to the neo-expression of GRN or due to new promoter elements in cis position that could come from a retro-element, for example) (Lynch et al. 2015). As a consequence, the repeated variation should also be analysed at the transcriptional and epigenetic level (Pankey et al. 2014; Gallant et al. 2014; Pfenning et al. 2014).

Concerning physiological character (function), as said above, a new function could correspond to the set-up of complex organs. At the physiological level, we can distinguish several sublevels: biochemical (metabolism), electrophysiological, mechanical and physical. For the biochemical and the electrophysiological levels, the function will be supported by the DGB even though the transcriptional state of the involved genes may be regulated at an upper level in the GRN (see, for example, the electrogenesis case: Gallant et al. 2014; Zakon et al. 2006). In the case of a simple biochemical shift, this can be explained by a mutation on a DGB (Hiller et al. 2012). This will be also the case for metabolic enzyme (Hiller et al. 2012) or for a gene coding a protein that gives a resistance to a poison or an antibiotic-resistant enzyme. Note also that a shift in the activity could be due to a difference at transcriptional or post-transcriptional level in the case of biochemical shift. It will thus be important to scan at the protein level but also at the transcriptional and epigenetic level.

1.2.2.2 Link Between the Different Biological Levels
It has to be noted that isoconvergence at one level could be correlated with either iso- or alloconvergence, or difference at the other biological levels; one of the paradigmatic examples is the flying capacity of bats and birds which came from an organ that allowed their common ancestor to walk. This is a clear case of isoconvergent evolution at the functional level, but in that case the organ involved in this function evolved via divergent evolution from the same ancestral character. Another example, the fly for butterfly, birds and mammals, is a case of alloconvergent evolution, since at the functional level the ancestral structure was not involved in the walk in the insect ancestor. The organ evolved via different arms in the case of birds/mammals, lateral lobes in the case of insects via divergent evolution. Another example can be found in the case of enzyme, the function of which evolved via alloconvergent evolution, with different ancestral functions and the same derived function. However, they evolved from a different structure in a divergent manner.

In the case of alloconvergent evolution , it is therefore difficult to make the link between structure and function. For example, in the case of enzyme, we cannot predict the involved amino acids at the sequence or biophysical levels. When the ancestor is different, many ways are possible to obtain the derived function, except if alloconvergent evolution is also present at the structural level. Therefore, the link between the evolution of the structure and the evolution of the function is not possible in that case.

In the case of enzymatic isoconvergent evolution , where the process starts likely from the same structure and the same function, it is plausible that the same change occurred at that protein level (amino acid sequence, biophysical properties). Several reports show that for receptors or enzymes: Mirceta et al. (2013), Ujvari et al. (2015). This phenomenon could be due to epistasis and pleiotropy (Martin and Orgogozo 2013).

In the case of isoconvergence at functional level, the link with the other level will be less evident, as seen above it is at the superior biological level than at the morphological one. So if isoconvergent evolution is present at the physiological level, the morphological level has to be checked (whenever possible) before proceeding to the other levels (genetic, epigenetic). If one has access only at the physiology, without knowledge of the supporting structure (e.g. adaptation to aquatic life), the relation with the other biological levels will be less evident. However, as described by many authors, the more similar the species, the higher the chance to have the same evolving mechanism (Conte et al. 2012).

1.2.2.3 Origin of the Genetic Variation: De Novo Versus Standing Variation
In the case of iso- or alloconvergent evolution at the nucleic acid and amino acid levels, the convergence could be due to independent mutations in the different lineages (de novo mutations) or due to standing variation or any other processes corresponding to horizontal gene transfer. This has been explained in the literature by Stern (2013), or Martin and Orgogozo (2013). The question is how to distinguish standing variation from de novo mutations. This point is important since, depending on the origin of the mutations, we cannot use the same model; in the case of de novo mutation, we need to use a model based on the phylogeny, whereas in the case of transfer or substitutions coming from the standing variation, different models are needed.

In general, the longer the time of separation between species where isoconvergence is found ancient, the weaker the chances to find pre-existing mutations between such species. Several mechanisms could explain why a pre-existing mutation will be shared across “distant” species: (i) incomplete lineage sorting due to rapid speciation, (ii) balancing selection, (iii) hybridization, (iv) paleo-hybridization in a group that separated but entered in contact again, followed by a new separation or any case of horizontal gene transfer (Bird et al. 2015). The different trait included at the genome level will not follow a bifurcative story, even if the paleo-hybridization event is old. In the case of paleo-hybridization, the conflicting topology will occur at the time the events occurred and a little bit after that, due to the allele sorting. For example, there is a probability that hybridization occurred at the base of the mammalian radiation, and this is why we may have conflicting histories between the mammalian lineages (Hallström and Janke 2010).

1.2.2.4 De Novo Isoconvergent Evolution from the Genotype to the Phenotype
Once the isoconvergent evolution has been identified at the phenotype level, the hypothesis of co-convergent evolution with the other levels can be tested (see Figs. 1.2 and 1.3). To do so, one needs to perform ancestral reconstruction and show that the apomorphy occurred in a convergent manner. This should be done for each biological level. In cases where the events at the different levels are concomitant (co-convergence), a possible cause-to-effect relationship across the levels will be evidenced (Fig. 1.2 and 1.3).

Direct link from genome to phenotype
Amino acid substitution that could cause a character shift (Fig. 1.3).

Zhang and Kumar (1997) as well as Foote et al. (2015) linked the convergent evolution at the amino acid level with the convergent evolution at the phenotypic level. The probable evolution of the amino acid is evaluated using a likelihood-based model. The next step is then to detect the shift from the plesiomorphic to the isoconvergent apomorphic sites. This is done by reading automatically the phylogenetic tree. However, in these studies and in all the studies published so far that linked the phenotype to the genotype, the reconstruction of the phenotypic character evolution (most of time discrete characters) is performed with an algorithm based on the Mirkin et al.’s (2003) approach, even if the authors do not write it explicitly. This algorithm evidences where the characters are present on a group of leaves and where they are absent, to conclude that the characters appeared after the separation of the groups having or not the characters, which is an approximation, except if one has access to fossils or other information as in the case of the marine mammals where one can guess that the ancestral reconstruction of the way of life is correct since lots of information show that the ancestors of the marine groups were terrestrial.

It should be noted that in general, character reconstruction could be done using stochastic approaches (maximum likelihood; for example, see for review Royer Carenzi et al. 2013).

Of course, convergence at amino acid levels due to noise is possible and gives a false signal. The significance increases if many positions are needed to get the new phenotype (and if several genes are needed for a given phenotype). However, it has to be noted that only few amino acid changes can lead to a shift of the function for a given protein and that, even if the statistical test is inconclusive, the changes can be involved in the phenotypic shift.

Zhang and Kumar (1997) developed a test where they looked whether the number of alloconvergent or isoconvergent amino acids that occurred in two or more orthologues is above what is expected. A similar but different test has been developed by Castoe et al. (2009). In their analysis, these authors were interested to test whether two species evolved more convergently (at least) for a part of their genomes. The authors tested all the branches and tested whether the chosen species evolved more convergently than the other couple of species or against simulated data.

Detection of evolutionary isoconvergent “characteristics” at genomic level
Coding sequence

If the isoconvergent evolution at the phenotypic level results from adaptation, it is possible that the causal mutation at the genome level has been selected, and a test to detect positive selection can be used so that the protein that evolved under positive selection in a convergent manner can therefore be detected. The nice thing with this method is that even if different amino acids are involved in a similar functional shift in the coding sequence, the genotype to the phenotype link is possible (this approach has been used by Parker et al. (2013), Foote et al. (2015), for review: Levasseur et al. 2007). Concerning the shift on the constraints seen on common or different sites of the same protein (Gu et al. 2001; Lichtage et al. 1996; Gribaldo et al. 2003), a general relaxation of a protein (different sites on the same protein) could mean that some of its functions are less important for the fitness of the species. Here again, we can test whether we have more relaxation than expected. An extreme case is the loss of function (pseudogenization). This has been nicely shown in the case of the convergent loss of the GULO gene involved in the vitamin C synthesis (Hiller et al. 2012).

We could also have the case of different genes involved in the same convergent phenotype but belonging to the same network, for example: all the orthologues of a network where at least one gene evolves under positive selection or has the same constraint in the different species presenting the convergent phenotypic character. The protein corresponding to these genes could be involved in the same cascade, the same network, the same pathway (Foote et al. 2015).

Non-coding sequence
In analyses at the promoter level, one first needs to identify the promoters. This is possible for species that are close phylogenetically as promoter conservation is possible. In any cases, it is easier to detect convergent evolution in the case of a deregulation (loss of the expression in a given tissue, for example). In that case, the promoters should evolve quicker than expected, as reported for Shaven Baby (Frankel et al. 2012). Therefore, the cause of an expression loss should be possible to detect.

However, it would be really difficult to evidence the causal mutation of a new expression territory (especially if the mutation is not the same). Nonetheless, many examples in the literature show that a new expression territory could be due to the integration of a retro-element in the gene promoter (Lynch et al. 2015) or a new function could be due to an LTR coding sequence (Naville et al. 2016; Pavlicev et al. 2015), and one can look for such sequences surrounding the orthologous genes in the species that show convergent evolution at phenotypic level and evidence their absence in the species where the phenotype is absent.

Molecular level: convergent evolution of physical–chemical protein characteristics
A new protein function could not be due to specific amino acid changes but due to the overall physical properties. In that case, it is possible to perform an ancestral reconstruction of the physical properties of the protein families and looked for isoconvergent shift and then looked for the co-isoconvergence for the studied function (see Mirceta et al. 2013; Ujvari et al. 2015).

Detection of genetic events other than substitutions
Other genetic events can be evidenced (Gouret et al. 2011; Dainat et al. 2012; Dainat and Pontarotti 2014; Le et al. 2012; Paganini et al. 2012) and linked to the phenotype shift (Cayrou et al. 2012; Levasseur et al. 2012).

1.2.2.5 Detection of Isoconvergent Evolution at Intermediate Biological Levels
Expression data
The difference is observed directly in one gene of the GRN. As said above, it will be really difficult to identify the causative mutation. Therefore, in that case, one needs to investigate the expression data of the concerned tissues. Once the gene co-opted is evidenced, one can look at the cis regulatory region or search for an epigenetic signature such as the methylation status of the gene that has been shown to be over- or underexpressed as reported by Lynch et al. (2015).

We therefore need to have access to the concerned tissues and perform expression studies using a methodology similar to the one described by Pankey et al. to evidence the similarity between the two isoconvergent derived tissues and the difference with the others. These analyses can then be integrated in an interaction network, signalling pathway, metabolic pathway or gene regulation network (Gallant et al. 2014; Pankey et al. 2014; Pfenning et al. 2014).

It has to be noted that in that case, the authors did not use ancestral reconstruction followed by the search of the shift. They performed a comparative transcriptomic analysis between the new cells or organs, as compared to the other cells or organs of the species where the convergent cell tissues have been evidenced, and looked for what is common for the isoconvergent tissues and different for the others.

Integration of the different biological levels
The further step is to integrate the different levels seen in Fig. 1.1, in order to explain the cause/consequence effect from the genotype to the phenotype. To the best of our knowledge, only one example of co-convergence at sequence, expression and phenotype has only been done in one case where mutation in the promoter was linked to the expression loss, leading to the loss of a phenotype (see for a complete story Stern and Frankel 2013). In that case, the promoters should evolve quicker than expected. This is what is happening for Shaven Baby (Frankel et al. 2012), a GRN gene that controls several differential battery genes. In that case, the loss of a phenotypic trait should be possible to detect. However, to evidence the causal mutation of a new expression territory would be really difficult. However, as many examples in the literature show that a new expression territory could be due to a new integration of a retro-element in the gene promoter (Lynch et al. 2015), the identification of similar retro-element in front of differential expressed gene should be possible.

1.2.3 Database Organization
Based on the points discussed in this article, it will be useful to develop a database and mandatory that this database uses an ontology that takes into account the different levels and links one to the other (Fig. 1.2). The database could be filled in by the different collaborators. The database we propose will offer a new way to analyse the different types of convergent evolution: separate apparition of the same derived state (apomorphic) in at least two distinct lineages from the same ancestral state (isoconvergence) or from different ancestral states (alloconvergence), considering the different biological levels. In other words, an amino acid substitution could induce a shift in an enzymatic function. The latter could be linked to a shift in the metabolite that can infer a shift in the phenotype at morphological and/or at physiological levels. Thus, because of the complexity of the reality and the wide variety of the data, this database will be flexible enough to store biological data as well as to incorporate different biological levels.

1.3 Conclusion/Road Map
In conclusion, we propose (1) to re-analyse all the cases of convergent evolution at the phenotype level described in the literature and sort out cases of isoconvergence, (2) to identify undescribed cases of isoconvergent evolution, (3) to use the strategies developed in this article to study these cases and on selected school case studies as, for example, the evolution of the active electro-localization in fishes and (4) to create an international effort by the access of the database that is able to integrate the different cases of isoconvergence at different biological levels.
