The general topic of this research and the reported findings are very relevant for Biology Direct, however the current version of this MS is certainly not yet ready for publication.

Even though I am willing to trust the authors about their main conclusions, I strongly recommend major revisions, because it is currently hardly possible to evaluate most of the evidence on which they based their observations.
In short:
- The trees supporting lateral gene transfers should be presented in an organized fashion in a Supp. Mat.
- Many current figures are not of sufficient quality to be printed in a journal (gene/taxon names are impossible to read, etc.)
- The methodology used for the tree reconstruction is not sufficiently detailed: crucial information such as the number of positions retained or the substitution models used are lacking.
- Many figures presented in the text are under-interpreted, and not critically discussed.
Elements requiring significantly more details:
p.4. l. 86: The authors report that ‘M. abscessus proteomes were aligned using Mauve software [24]’. I am not familiar with ProgressiveMauve, but does this software really align proteomes, or is it rather a tool to align genomes based on their content and gene order? If so, the next sentence in the MS is hard to understand
‘Then M. abscessus tree was constructed using Neighbor-Net algorithm in the package SplitsTree’. What distance matrix was provided to Splitstree? What was this distance reflecting?
If the proteomes alignments evoked above were ‘classic’ protein alignments, then what happened to poorly aligned sites? How many positions were retained? For how many proteins? The material and methods must be much more detailed for the reader to really understand the analysis and the results. Please note that this criticism also applies for the trees that show some LGT.
p.5. l, 95–96: The analysis described here faces a potential pitfall if ‘presence’ and ‘absence’ were treated in a symmetric fashion, especially if there were lots of ‘absences’ in this matrix. While ‘presences’ can be used to group genomes sharing some features, more caution is required in the use of shared ‘absences’.
If the groupings of genomes are firstly caused by the lack of shared features, then these groupings can be very artefactual (sharing ‘losses’ is different from sharing nothing. The potential problem here is that two genomes that have positively nothing, or not much in common, may still be grouped due to their lack of genes, while sometimes it is a better idea not to group genomes that share nothing in common!). How did the authors address this potential issue?
p.5, l. 98–108: Incongruence between trees is considered to be synonym of lateral gene transfer, and the possibility of tree reconstruction artefacts is not discussed. Since the tree reconstruction methods are poorly described, it is difficult to evaluate this part of the work.
p.6., l. 119: The authors write that ‘a phylogenetic tree was constructed based on Tape Measure Proteins (TMP)’ What are ‘Tape Measure Proteins’? Why this marker? What methods/positions/models were used to reconstruct this tree?
p.7, l. 156. Figure 4A: I have not been able to see this figure, or if it refers to the split network, then its description in the text must be expanded and be more critical. What do the proportion/size/presence of splits indicate? What is their biological meaning? Also for example, what does the position of M. massiliense BD type strain suggest? Same question for the position of M. abscessus 47 J26?
p.7, l.160: same problem with Figure 4B.
Overall, the exploitation of these 2 figures is a bit vague. The authors only write about it that: ‘A phylogenomic tree based on prophage gene content (i.e., the presence or absence of orthologous proteins) showed an organization that differed from that of the M. abscessus tree (Figure 4B).’ Please, increase the descriptions of what these differences are (or use a metrics to compare these two split networks).
p.8, l.165: Figure 5 is neither described nor exploited in a way that allows to make sense of the main text about it. Please, give more time to a careful critical description of the figure.
p.8, l. 172: The 214 phylogenetic trees mentioned here (reconstructed how, please precise) should be logically classified and presented as Supp. Mat, or made available somewhere. Currently, it is simply impossible to review this part of the MS without being able to look at the evidence.
p.10. l-210-211: ‘Also, M. abscessus complex phages further shuttled gene transferts, 16/29 (55%) of which occurred between different M. abscessus complex clusters but 13/29 (45%) of which occurred between strains of the same cluster, clearly indicating it is an on-going process’. Where do these numbers come from? How were they obtained? Where is the evidence?
p.19, l. 379: Figure 2 legend: What is ‘an interacting map’? How is one supposed to read such a map? What are the nodes? What are the edges? More descriptions are required.
There are also some minor typos/issues:
p.3, l. 56 ‘three different organisms’: do you really mean organisms, or species, or strains here?
.p.4, l.86 (and in some other places in the text): the authors refer to the splitsnetwork as the ‘M. abscessus tree’. Elswhere, as in the legend of Figure 4, they call this type of graphs ‘network trees’. This wording is confusing. Is it a network or is it a tree? To me, each of this graph should be called a split network.
p.5., l. 95: Likewise, what the authors call ‘a whole-genome phylogenetic tree’ looks very much like a network.
Figure 2: ‘Few exceptions were observed: strains M139 and 1S_51_0915 showed prophage region homology with the M. abscessus cluster while M. bolletii M24 showed prophage region homology with the M. massiliense cluster’. Please help the reader more to see this, it is impossible to guess where the strains discussed here are in this map, add some arrows.Figure 3 is likely too large in its current format for publication.
p.6, l.136: ‘Interestingly”. Why? Please explain why it is interesting.
SI 1 & 2: ‘porphages’ should be prophages Figure legends: Figure 1: ‘Phylogentic’ must be fixed + see problems with Figure 4 and Figure 2 legends discussed above.
p.34. Table three: what is the difference between a ‘parent species’ and a ‘donor species?’ (‘donor’ takes only 1 ‘n’). What does the column ‘Nb Duplications before parent’ refers to?
The revised version of the MS by Sassi et al. is improved. I am still uncertain whether the quantification of HGT using gene trees means much biologically. I suppose this is because I doubt that trees alone convey that kind of evidence anyway. I am more convinced by studies of synteny showing prophages with similar genes inserted at various positions of Mycobacterium genomes. I remain also unconvinced (to be honest somewhat skeptical) about the quality of the figures. I suppose this latter possible issue would be addressed by the publisher then.
p.9. l. 195. The content of Additional file 4 is useful, also not yet perfect for its purpose: both trees with and without candidate HGT are present in this file (i.e. there are around 214 trees in it, not 156 trees), making it difficult to evaluate the trees with HGT only. The legend for this file (p.27, l.614) is confusing as it seems to announce 214 trees with candidate HGT. When one looks at some of these tree files however, one finds the following associated description: ‘None horizontal gene transfert event’. (So some of these trees should be removed from Additional file 4, and the English of this final description could be improved).
p.9. l.199-201: When discussing the sources of HGT, I find it strange that the category ‘unknown’ is not quantified, nor discussed. In the few trees I have looked at from additional file 4, ‘unknown’ was the major HGT donor…
p.10. l. 227. ‘a different topology’, sure, but a topology of what? I suppose of split networks. Indeed, the networks look different, but note that their difference is still not assessed by any formal distance computed between them, nor by any statistical test. Some might find that this aspect of the study would have deserved to be improved.
All the minor comments were corrected.