This paper presents potentially interesting data and a possibly compelling result – lateral gene transfers of genes between animal species-, that if confirmed, would certainly deserve to be reported to a broad audience of readers. Yet, a great deal of caution is required before accepting the conclusion proposed here. In my view the present study is still too weak to support the conclusion.

Certainly, the authors reject several alternative hypotheses to explain the bizarre distribution of cytb genes in bruchids. For instance, the presence of two divergent copies of the cytb gene in Z. subfasciatus, one of them being very conserved in sequence and shared by a set of traditionally distantly related taxa, deserves some explanation. In that respect, the authors are right to attract our attention of this result. They exclude the possibility of contamination, hybridization events and the possibility that one of the copies is in fact a pseudogene. Importantly enough though, I feel that more work is needed to test their final proposition and to conclude in favour of the lateral transfer of the gene between animals, based on the sole evidence presented here. Some more in depth analyses should be performed in order to test their claim and to propose a more precise interpretation of the data. Typically, questions about the mechanism of acquisition of this second copy of cytb should be at the heart of such future studies. Nevertheless, some quick adjustments could be incorporated into a moderately revised version of this manuscript.

It might be of some help in deciding if it is premature or legitimate to quote this study as a case of lateral gene transfer in animals if the authors could answer some of the questions below.

1. Is it really impossible that an endoparasite is a source of a contamination, that the relatively conserved cytb gene shared by the three species is not of bruchid origin and that the observations may be partly artefactual?

If these species hosted a population of closely related endoparasite, could not two cytb sequences be amplified from these organisms? In this case, we would get the sequences of the population of endoparasites (presenting thus some distinct but related haplotypes) and the one for the bruchid? What does a blast of this additional copy teach us: who are the closest completely sequenced relatives having homologues to this additional sequence? Including these data in a broader phylogenetic tree via a broader cytb alignment would certainly be a very important additional result to present to the readers. Are these bruchid sequences still monophyletic when a larger taxonomic sample is investigated and, if not, where do these gene copies branch in the tree? How much evidence support that these two sequences are carried in the genome of the bruchid (i.e. in the mitochondrial DNA of the species as the result of an actual transfer)?

2. Could insect species of the outgroup carry as well more than one cytb copy?

If we admit that the bruchid carries two copies and that this is not contamination, and if it carries them within its mitochondria, the scenario of a transfer is appealing, except if the presence of two copies is a "normal" condition for those insects. Without the study of the genetic composition of the outgroup, it is not clear to me if the apparently original situation of the Z. subfasciatus individuals (with two copies of cytb present in the Altiplano) is ancestral (vertically inherited) or derived (laterally acquired).

Could it be the case that the outgroup of these species actually already contained two copies of this gene? Are there precedents of related organisms with two cytb genes? Could it be tested by studying the composition of some completely sequenced mitochondrial genomes? Could then the present result be explained either (i) by a much more ancient lateral gene transfer (somewhere at the base of the bruchids, in which case the scenarios should try to explain this ancient phenomenon) or if not, eventually (ii) by some complex scenarios of independent genes losses to explain the patchy distribution of cytb in current bruchid populations?
3. Can one deduce anything about the mechanisms of recombination that inserted the new copy, if they are all within the mitochondrial bruchid genome?

If there is only one type of mitochondria in the bruchids, and if this mitochondria carries the two gene copies, it seems at first sight that the presence of two cytb copies in Z. subfasciatus rules out the hypothesis of a legitimate recombination to transfer this gene. Such a mechanism would likely have led to the replacement of one former cytb copy by another one, resulting in one copy per species. Could the opposite observation suggest then that the additional cytb was transferred in kind of a hitch-hiking process, due to the insertion of one (or more) other markers in the mitochondrial DNA, which could have themselves happened by homologous recombination? In this case the HGT event would be even larger, and would concern several markers. By contrast, for the species presenting only one copy of cytb, could we study the location of this single copy with more precision? A (partial) study of the genetic composition of the mitchondrial genome of these bruchids, typically of the genes bordering the cytb gene, could be very informative here. They may or may not have retained evidence of recombination or synteny. Would it be possible to characterise the genetic context of the cytb genes and test their conservation in later studies to decide if there was one or several instance of LGT and what was their mechanism? Alternatively, could the cytb copy be jumping using transposases? Do we have any evidence for/against the implication of transposons in this story?
4. About the nature of the most likely vector: virus, endoparasite or... even an host reservoir?

I was interested by the different hypotheses presented in this paper regarding the vector of the possible lateral transfer. Viruses and endoparasites might be good candidates indeed, although I was wondering if a third possibility, inspired by the "you are what you eat theory" (see. W.F. Doolittle, 1998), could not be raised as well. Since these bruchid species share a host, could not their host have provided them the additional cytb copy?
5. Ecological scenarios and the interest of harbouring two cytb copies to survive in the Altiplano.

I may have misunderstood, but I believe that the authors suggest that the persistence of two copies (or at least the swapping of cytb genes) could serve the purpose of an endoparasite. My naïve question is: could not it serve the purpose of the bruchids themselves? Could not they benefit in the Altiplano from such a genomic make up? Do we have any way to investigate the biochemistry/activity of these two divergent copies in more depth that would suggest to us that even if they are related their function is only partially overlapping?