Preamble to the reader
Before starting my detailed review of this paper, I want to express my personal esteem for T. Cavalier-Smith repeated contributions to the field of evolutionary biology. All along the years, he has often put forward important ideas and original hypotheses that have prompted many debates about the evolution of life, all domains included. Multiple tests of his works have taught us that even if T. Cavalier-Smith's claims were not necessarily right, his thought provocative publications always deserved the consideration of the scientific community. Without a doubt, T. Cavalier-Smith has an impressive biological culture and there is a lot to learn from him. There is also another more special motive to read T. Cavalier-Smith: his very interesting scientific style. Certainly, his global, synthetic, systematic approach often leads him to produce very long papers. Yet, as far as I am concerned, I find such papers fascinating to read, as they exposed not only elaborated and integrated narratives about evolution, but also as they introduce a very original evolutionary epistemology. It is not uninteresting to analyze T. Cavalier-Smith's treatments of his explicit and implicit methodological principles all along a paper, and how, sometimes while he pretends to practice the most solid mainstream hard core science, he is in fact proposing audacious heterodox interpretations. In one words, some parts of the works of this major author are pretty subjective, and to me, this observation is not a criticism. Imaginative efforts of interpretation and in depth analyses are obviously deeply needed in the complex area of evolutionary biology. There are thus many reasons why someone might want to read even the longest T. Cavalier-Smith papers, as they can be fun, enriching and compelling. Yet, because of the level of complexity of those papers where T. Cavalier-Smith pilots us at will, we should always remain cautious before turning into enthusiastic unconditional supporters of his views. The present contribution does not make exception. It is certainly an attractive and stimulating paper, and it will take multiple additional analyses by several specialists to evaluate some of its taxonomical and mechanical hypotheses of evolution. Personally, I remain agnostic on most of the conclusions presented here but I want to encourage numerous readers to test as much as they can this highly interesting version of Cavalier-Smith's Tree of Life, with alternative tools, logic and interpretations.
To the author
I totally agree with your opinion that "an integrative approach, though recently unfashionable, is sorely needed in the face of the mass of new genomic data to suggest biologically well-grounded hypotheses to guide detailed experimental studies in the laboratory." (P.6, paragraph 4, the primacy of transition analysis), and I support your impressive efforts in this sense. I obviously encourage the publication of your manuscript, but I insist that some revisions could improve its quality and makes it more readable. This is why the rest of my comments are either suggestions, critics or questions that I would be honored you address.

As it presently stand, I feel that the paper contains 3 different papers in one: (i) the rooting of the tree of life by transition analyses, (ii) the proposition/definition of several new clades (such as the gracilicutes, etc.), (iii) the re-affirmation that Archaea are really recent. I think that these three papers, related but different in scope, would benefit from individual submissions and very likely from the expertise of different specialists to be as seriously evaluated as they deserve. I feel that otherwise there is a risk for some of your numerous conclusions to be overlooked by referees, who would like to encourage the publication of the main conclusion of this paper, supposedly about the root of the tree of life, but finally about all the tree of life.
Comments about the existence of a tree of life and its root
I think that your discussion about the Tree of Life, which comes closer to the end of the manuscript than to the beginning, p.105–106, could be more balanced, as you take the existence of a tree as an a priori hypothesis, and you never test it. "The claim that there may be no real tree of life because of lateral gene transfer [158]is profoundly mistaken; all cellular inheritance in prokaryotes is vertical, not horizontal, as cell fusion never occurs except occasionally in Streptomyces. It is meaningful to ask whether the last common ancestor of life had eubacterial or archaebacterial membrane lipids, whether it had one or two bounding membranes, whether it had flagella or not, whether it was photosynthetic or not" is a little too short to summarize a complex debate. This might deserve more explanations. In fact, one can wonder if your conclusion that 13 characters are congruent means that the majority of the metabolic/ultrastructural characters also followed this common vertical backbone? And if not, it questions us on the robustness of the tree presented here and about what will happen when more characters will be added to polarize different part of it. At this topic, you acknowledge that the resolution and clade definition is sensitive to the sampling of characters, and you expose that it is possible that in the future other characters might contradict your present conclusions. Should it be the case, you would change the groups definitions – that renders the paper so long – or you would change the synapomorphies, but you would never really challenge the very idea of a vertical universal structure on which one could map all the characters evolution. Why is it a safe practice? Could you comment a little bit more on your tree-like perspective in the MS?

From my narrow phylogenic perspective, it is presently unclear to me that character evolution has to follow a tree-like pattern for all the organisms. There are certainly some cases of lateral gene transfers, and differential losses that can be misleading. You as well mentioned some complex situations (p.6)" with congruence testing a serious mistake in one part of the tree may be revealed by incongruence with other parts. If two polarizations in different parts of the tree are incongruent (contradictory), then either the topology of the tree is incorrect or one of the polarizations is incorrect, and the source of the conflict can be sought for and at least one of the interpretations corrected in the light of the overall evidence from as many sources as possible". You claim that your characters are immune to this problem, but is there any formal way/test to make us confident about which characters did not undergo an incongruent evolution and which ones did?
You wrote "Figure ​Figure22 emphasizes that the most fundamental question concerning the root of the tree of life is whether the ancestral cell had two bounding membranes (i.e. was a negibacterium, as argued here) or just one membrane as in archaebacteria and posibacteria." This might indeed be an important question. However to me the most fundamental question concerning the root of the TOL is: "is there a single last common ancestor bearing all the characters investigated here or could some of the defining features have been carried by different individuals of contemporary populations?" Do you have any way in your methods to test that there is indeed a last common ancestor and not multiple contemporary ancient populations, possibly exchanging DNA at that time or responsible for the evolution of some feature used here? I am not referring to poorly shaped progenotes there, as your last common ancestor seemed itself fairly evolved. In fact, could an organism such as the last ancestor of all life, "a non-flagellate, non-spore-forming, eubacterium with acyl-ester membrane lipids, a murein peptidoglycan wall, and fully developed eubacterial molecular biology and cell division mechanisms"p.101, have really been alone on Earth, immune to any character exchanges with contemporaries? If not, why would we like to trace back all the living beings characters to such a single root?
Comments about the transition analysis methodology in general
It might be interesting/helpful to clarify for the readers the conditions under which your approach will succeed, but also the conditions under which your methods would fail. I imagine lateral gene transfers, a common ancestor lacking any of the characters used in the transition analyses, a too large number of ancient phyla to be resolved by a few synapormorphies, might be problematic. Considering these conditions, do we know if the use of the methodology is safe as such a deep level as the root of the TOL?
Comments about the numbers and the definitions of the clades
A limited number of characters can only resolve a tree if the numbers of clades is itself limited. We seemed to be in such a favorable situation here, but how can we be sure that the 10 clades you retained are correct/acceptable, independently of the character you used to polarize the tree? Are not we lacking some independent evidence at this topic? I see how some clades take form as the outcome of your transition analyses (i.e the monophyly of Posibacteria, the location of Fusobacterium in Eurybacteria, the Glidobacteria), but don't you think that some clades could/should be more thoroughly established independently of these characters or a priori? If most of your clades are not defined independently of the characters used to postulate the root of the tree, then maybe more characters could just dramatically challenge your conclusions. Could you please comment on that, so that it does not seem that you are forging the groups that are matching your conclusions, instead of, for instance, being unable to resolve the problem. You could maybe summarize in a table further but independent evidence in favor of each of your clades and recall the results of phylogenetic trees of core markers about these groups? Are they for instance recovered in the paper of Cicarelli et al. published in Science, vol. 311, on March the 3rd, 2006? (I do not like this paper but maybe it could help supporting some of your claims). Should these trees be non existent, they could then be reconstructed by anyone who would like to test your propositions. I feel that this proposition might allow you to shorten your text a lot (see below), and thus encourage more people to discover its message.
Comments about the transition analysis of a single character versus the transition analyses of multiple characters simultaneously
The congruence between transition analyses is a both a key and, with all the respect I have for you, a blind spot of your methodology, at least the way it is currently written... I do not want to seem negative: what I mean is that I wonder if there are not multiple equiparcimonious scenarios of transition analysis when we look at data character by character. I am sure you considered that, and identify these possibilities. For instance, you might have deduced that character 1 was compatible with two stories A and B, but as the TS analysis of character 2 was in favor of the story A, you might have retained the story A as the correct/congruent scenario for both characters. For instance, the evolution of the flagella requires a certain condition of the membrane, you said, before proposing a congruent scenario that would explain how these two features evolved. Intermediate results of your analyses, not only the conclusions, could be important as well for the readers. Maybe, you could resume the different equiparcimonious scenarios in a table character by character, so that anyone could check which are the almost congruent alternative scenarios for the root, if there are some. Furthermore, other researchers could then use the full extent of your work to add their own new characters. Maybe, when they will add new data, the congruence between transition analyses of multiple characters may then favor a different but equiparcimonious scenario for the character 1 (i.e. maybe now, story B will be the one to use to build the most congruent scenario). Proposing these intermediate considerations would finally convince anyone that you envisaged and tested (exhaustively) or many possibilities and would help not to overlook alternative rooting propositions.
Comment about the bounding membranes
In "Multiple transition analyses of complex multimolecular characters can root the tree, paragraph 1", you wrote "Figure ​Figure22 emphasizes that the most fundamental question concerning the root of the tree of life is whether the ancestral cell had two bounding membranes (i.e. was a negibacterium, as argued here) or just one membrane as in archaebacteria and posibacteria (collectively therefore called unibacteria [1]), as has traditionally been widely assumed." Could you comment on Koonin EV, Martin W. (On the origin of genomes and cells within inorganic compartments. Trends Genet. 2005 Dec;21(12):647–54. Epub 2005 Oct 11) who offered an alternative to this view?
Some arguable claims
In "Multiple transition analyses of complex multimolecular characters can root the tree, paragraph 2, p.13", you mentioned that "bayesian relaxed molecular clock analyses calibrated by multiple palaeontological dates for 143 proteins [31]and for 18S rRNA [32]suggest that the eukaryote cenancestor was only about 1.1 Gy old, whereas the fossil record indicates that eubacteria are at least 2.8 and probably about 3.5 Gy old [1,33]." To my knowledge, Hug and Roger are about to publish a paper suggesting that this molecular dating of eukaryotes, among other, is not convincing. Since it is fairly accepted that molecular dating is indeed not satisfactory enough, you might be willing to tone down the claim based on such references. I think the age of the origin of eukaryotes is not settled so far, at least by phylogeny.
Comment on scenarios based on complexification
For instance: In "HslV to proteasome differentiation polarizes the evolutionary transition, p.19, 1 paragraph"

I use this ("I argue here that the proteasome 20S core particle evolved from the simpler HslV, not the reverse.") as a starting point for my general questions and as a potential position in the text to "anchor" the following comments.

Your arguments are often pretty compelling, but could you ensure the reader that you dealt with characters for which the complexification was indeed constant along evolution, and not where complexification and simplification alternated due to changes in organisms way of life. Could you ensure that two different lines of descent were not actually existing, which evolved differentially from an intermediate common ancestor, one line symplifying and the other one complexifying? In this last case, the root should be in between the two lines and not within the simplest one.
I wonder this, since you notably wrote: "It is well known that evolution can involve simplification as well as stepwise increases in complexity.Therefore, the fact that one can see functional advantages in the proposed increase of complexity from smaller and simpler HslV to larger and more complex 20S proteasomes, though adaptively much more plausible than evolution in the reverse direction, for which no selective advantage is apparent, is not in itself proof that evolution occurred in that direction.", p.21. This is fair enough, but it also underlines how the transition analyses scenarios can be somehow fragile and dependent from our imagination to conceive selective advantages. Practically, in most of the case, but for the double-membranes of negibacteria, considered primitive with respect to the simple membrane of posibacteria, you seemed to decide that the less complex stage is the one involving a more limited structural diversity in terms of components. How did you rule out – if you did – that having a simpler molecular organization could not actually correspond to a refinement, an optimization going away from a more complex/heavy structure? If there is no reason that there should be a unique tendency in evolution (i.e. toward complexification all along the TOL from the root), should we expect that living beings would experiment different adaptations?

In the case of the HslV, which selective advantages were brought in by the addition of alpha and beta subunits, each with partitioned functions only? Would not it be conceivably potentially advantageous to loose such partitioned subunits, little operational on their own, for the economy of the cell? Is it that counter-selected to use less proteins with fragmentary functions to make its proteasome than to use more of these proteins? Among other different motives, you expose as a rebuttal to this kind of reverse scenario that: "arguing that HslVU evolved from proteasomes would leave totally unanswered how 20S proteasomes evolved. If HslV were not the ancestor of the a and beta-subunits, what is? " p.23. You are right, but why should this ancestral candidate still be around in today's organisms, especially if the tendency was to simplify the old structures and arguably the proteins performing the ancestral task were less efficient? Could you tell us more about that: is there a risk to polarize the data with a bias toward complexification or is there indeed such a genuine evolutionary tendency in prokaryotes?
Comments about the recency of Archaea
I have some concern with this part, as I think you should try to publish it as a separate paper, facing the possible objections of specialists of Archaea to see if they agree or not with this interesting idea. Personally, I have no preconceptions to locate Archaea close/far away from the base of the tree, but I am not convinced the arguments is truly needed here. In fact, you do not need to claim such a recency of archaea to root your tree in the Glidobacteria, you simply need to tell that Archaea are derived. How derived is not so much the problem for the root, as in doing so you complexify the paper by climbing up the tree again, instead of going down.

This being said, on some of your figures Archaea derived from paraphyletic actinobacteria (fig. ​(fig.5,5, ​,7),7), while in another one they are sister group of those actinobacteria (fig ​(fig3).3). I feel that, in terms of recency, it might make a big difference if they are sister-group to Actinobacteria, or even at the base of the Unibacteria. Based on figure ​figure7,7, I do not really see which synapomorphies constrained the Archaea to be higher in your tree than at the bottom of the Unibacteria, if we adopt your current polarisation and synapomorphies for Unibacteria, and why your neomuran revolution has too be that recent. I have thus a few naïve questions. Would not it be appealing to put the three revolutions you evoked closer by simply rearranging the order of emergence of your Unibacteria? Having slightly more early emerging Archaea than what you claim, would lead to the suggestion that the neomuran revolution was directly triggered by the loss of the OM, a consequence of the membranome revolution. And indeed, you argued that there must have been some important consequences of the unexpected increase in thickness of the medium murein sacculus of the negibacterial membrane. What prevent us to consider that following this unique membrane transformation due to some local environmental changes or mutation, a great period of instability in the morphology of prokaryotes was initiated? This would be the case if Archaea were not that recent. After all, some indirect evidence might suggest that the archaeal fossil record could be as old as 2.8 billion years, and I am aware of presently unpublished phylogenetic evidence in favor of a proximity between the certainly old cyanobacteria and Archaea. Also, if as you claimed the Archaea are recent, I am curious to know what would be according to you the selective advantage for modern organisms to evolve toward a relatively little efficient metabolism such as methanogenesis? By contrast, if Archaea are older than what you said, say at least at the base of Unibacteria, they might have been happy ancient methanogens, as they evolved this metabolism at a time where the atmosphere was still not that oxygenic.
Additional punctual questions about your scenarios
- For the proteasome evolution: how do we know it is easier to go from 6 to 7 fold symmetry?
- For the loss of the OM: you wrote p.29 :"the negibacterial double envelope is so complex that it must have arisen only once". Why not, but did the eye, that is so complex, arise once only? Is the "complexity" argument that compelling? With your strong knowledge of morphology could you tell us how complex are the most impressive cases of convergence within prokaryotes you could think of?
- You exposed both how mechanically easy and how historically difficult it is to loose the OM and concluded that : "As discussed below, all posibacteria have related machinery for achieving this, which establishes their monophyly. ", p.31. Yet, if loosing the OM is not that difficult mechanically, this argument is in fact arguable and the monophyly could be a bias against convergence. In term of parcimony, is the call for two independent losses of OM in all the history of all life much different anyway from the claim of one single loss? Both solutions seem quite parcimonious to me. For this reason, would you have any independent evidence/synapomorphy for the posibacteria/Unibacteria to support the conviction that the loss of OM happened only once? (This send us back to the general question of the independent definition of the clades, see above)
- For the evidence based on the L-ring/V-ring proteins

Phylogenetic trees of these proteins would help to decide if they can or cannot easily be transferred by LGT, especially for Aquifex and Thermotoga, before being taken as evidence for a vertical history. Could you tell us more about this?
- About the Chlorobacteria

In the figures legend, you acknowledged that this group might not be monophyletic, but in the main text you simply stated that "Chlorobacteria [1]comprise filamentous 'non-sulphur' green bacteria, e.g. Chloroflexus, Oscillochloris, Chloronema and Heliothrix, which can be photoheterotrophs or photoautotrophs; colourless heterotrophs, including thermophiles (e.g. Thermomicrobium, Herpetosiphon); and chlororespirers (Dehalococcoides)", p.64. Would you know how many published trees support or reject this grouping? Do we have a priori phylogenetic reasons to believe/not to believe in its monophyly?
- About Omp85

Your arguments are very interesting. Yet, it would be interesting to dispose of an Omp85 tree to see if its phylogenetic history matches the one of your proposed Tree of Life. This would confirm that this marker can be safely used to reason about this problem.
- About the ancestral complex membrane

It seems to me that regarding the origin of the negibacterial membrane, you pushed the difficulty further back in the past. It is thus difficult to evaluate if your scenario is truly parcimonious for this polarisation. Where does the ancestral negibacterial with its outer membrane come from? Was there ever a transition from one membrane to two membranes before LUCA?
- About the limited impact of short term adaptation on long term phylogeny

p. 106, you claim that "many lateral transfers seem more important for short term adaptation than for long-term phylogeny", but I do not see why these events, even if punctual, would not strongly reshape the long term phylogeny. After all, in your paper, is not the loss of the OM one of this short term adaptation with huge taxonomical consequences?
Minor comments:

To the reader:

Abstract, Background, first paragraph.

TCS considers the root of the tree of life as "the most difficult problems in phylogeny". Interestingly, Laporte in his ".Laporte, J. 2005. Is There a Single Objective, Evolutionary Tree of Life? Journal of Philosophy CII: 357–374.", recently argued along a different line, establishing that even at the smallest scale polarizing a phylogeny is incredibly problematic. This is also consistent with TCS later claims in this paper that "establishing the root of a small part of the tree is more straightforward, yet often surprisingly difficult for organisms without plentiful fossils", (p.3, background, first paragraph.)
In "The primacy of transition analysis, p.6, 4 paragraph"
"Search for congruence among multiple lines of evidence – the more diverse the better and resolving apparent contradictions by weighing up the evidence is not special to evolutionary biology but fundamental to all science." I think this is arguable. In a paper to be published soon in Philosophy and Biology, G. McOuat illustrates how eastern science can go for a different objective: highlighting conflict and incongruence as major features of scientific knowledge instead of stressing on congruence. K. Popper stressed on falsification not confirmation to realize scientific progress. T. Kuhn and P. Feyerabend would also argue that, deeply, science does not proceed so much by confirmation, but more by revolutions and shifts.
p. 107: TCS considers ref [162] as unduly pessimistic. As one of its author, I feel that many of the conceptual problems listed in this reference (diaphonia, criterion evaluation, circular reasoning and palaisma) are still present, even in TCS admirable work. In terms of optimism/pessimism, future studies will tell if the congruence defended in the present transition analyses, a major progress for the debate about the tree of life, can be considered as the solution or if the debate will keep going on. I bet it will.
Minor comments:

To the author.

In "The primacy of transition analysis, first paragraph"
It is not common practice in cladistics to use a grade. I do not mind it, but I do not know if cladists would enjoy your example of "reptiles", and give you their full support there.
In "Paralogue rooting failed clearly to root the tree"
You don't have to, but you might be willing to comment on Zhaxybayeva O, Lapierre P, Gogarten JP., Ancient gene duplications and the root(s) of the tree of life., Protoplasma. 2005 Dec;227(1):53–64. Epub 2005 Dec 30.
In "HslV to proteasome differentiation polarizes the evolutionary transition, 7 paragraph, p.23"
To conclude your scenario about HslV evolution, you say that "Thus mechanistic, selective, and ***phylogenetic*** arguments all unambiguously polarize the direction of evolution". You should remove "phylogenetic". I do not think it is tested, since it is not possible to do a phylogenetic tree with HslV, the alpha and the beta subunits, as you explained after, p. 25, 2nd paragraph.
The notion of "monophyletic grade" is unknown to me (p. 76). You could rephrase that for people with a cladist eye.