The hypothesis presented in the paper is likely wrong, but clever and interesting. I commend the authors for citing not only supporting evidence (loss of many cancer-relate domains), but evidence against it (retention of some domains and same rates of loss in cancer-related and control domains).

The only technical point I can make relates to identification of domains via analysis of ORFs (in the absence of published annotation). Could it be that the exon length in some species is so small that domains might have been missed by the applied procedure? A control could be systematic search for some other domains using the same procedure. Similarly, to be on the safe side, it might be a good idea to check for possible underannotation by searching for the missing domains in Myxosporea genomes directly, not relying on annotation. The authors mention hamster reticulum cell sarcoma as an example of transmissible cancer. This cancer is not mentioned in a number of recent reviews (e.g Ujvari, Papenfuss & Belov, Bioessays, 2016 and Riquet, Simon & Bierne, Evol. Appl., 2016). The most likely explanation is that the authors of these reviews have missed old publications, in particular, the 1964 one cited by the authors. However, there seems to be some conflicting evidence: while a 1965 paper (Banfield, Woke, Mackay & Cooper, Science, 1965) states that mosquitoes transmit cancer cells and not any other oncogenic agent, a 1973 paper suggests that reticulum cell sarcoma of Syrian hamsters is caused by SV40 virus (Diamandopoulos, J. Natl. Cancer Inst., 1973). Could that be a different type of this cancer, or could the authors of the 60’s papers miss this possibility? In interesting issue, not directly covered by the authors, is what genes should have evolved (or re-evolved) to regain multicellularity of Myxosporea, if the hypothesis of their cancer, unicellular origin is true.

The sentence “multicellularity evolved independently at least 46 times in eukaryotes” clearly contains a misprint. The grammar needs to be checked, e.g. some commas and articles are clearly redundant.