A DECADE AFTER THE FIRST FULL HUMAN
GENOME SEQUENCING: WHEN WILL WE
UNDERSTAND OUR OWN GENOME?

The contrast between the pomp of celebrating the firrst full human genome sequencing in 2000
and the cautious tone of recollections a decade thereafter could hardly be greater. The promises
with regard to medical cures and biotechnology applications have been realized not even nearly
to the expectations. Understanding the human genomes means knowing the genes' and proteins'
functions and their interconnectedness via biomolecular mechanisms. This articles estimates
how long will it take to achieve this goal if we extrapolate from the previous decade (indeed, a
century!) and the possible disruptive trends in science, technology and society that may
accelerate the pace of progress dramatically.
Keywords: Bioinformatics; full human genome sequencing; gene function; protein function
prediction; biomolecular mechanism.

1. What Does it Mean to Read the Human Genome as "Instruction Book of Life"?
Whereas the typical increments of scienti¯c progress accumulated in a snail-like
manner are usually not awarded any attention of the general public, the ¯rst full
human genome sequencing1,2 was celebrated at the beginning of the 21st century
with pomp unheard of and with no precedence in the history of science. Maybe, it requires being American (and it is the biomedical science of the USA which provided
the by far largest contribution) to give the event a spiritual, even religious turn that,
otherwise, is considered so misplaced in the scienti¯c context. When Bill Clinton
congratulated those who participated in the ¯rst sequence draft of the human
genome on 26 June 2000, he said, \Today we are learning the language in which
God created life. We are gaining ever more awe for the complexity, the beauty, the
wonder of God's most divine and sacred gift." The director of the Human Genome
Project, Francis Collins, followed him stating, \…we have caught the ¯rst glimpse
of our own instruction book, previously known only to God." (both quotes from
Ref. 3).
The contrast between this spectacle from the beginning of the 21st century and
the recollections summarizing the progress made in a decade thereafter is striking.
The author of Ref. 4 can hardly be accused of being shy or humble as he was one
of the top leaders who promoted the human genome project and helped politically
justifying total direct costs approaching USD 3 billion in the USA alone.5
Nevertheless, he concludes in his article from 2011 that \…medical revolutions
require many decades to achieve their full promise.… We must be scrupulous not
to promise the public a pharmacopoeia of quick pay-o®s" (quoted from Ref. 4).
Will it really require many decades for us to understand the human genome so
that the older among us will not have any hope to witness this breakthrough and
to bene¯t from it?
Indeed, this view sounds very di®erent compared with 2001 when, for example in
Ref. 6, it was promised that \Genetic prediction of individual risks of disease and
responsiveness to drugs will reach the medical mainstream in the next decade or so.
The development of designer drugs, based on a genomic approach to targeting
molecular pathways that are disrupted in disease, will follow soon after." In the early
years of the 21st century, there were wide expectations that the cures for so far nontreatable diseases and conditions and many urgently awaited biomedical and biotechnological applications are just around the corner.
Maybe it is naïve to believe that an e®ort like ¯rst full human genome sequencing
could have been acceptable to political decision makers without exaggeration of
bene¯ts and godly elevation of the cause. Whereas on one hand, it is generally
acknowledged that there is no future progress in human society without science, the
readiness of the decision-making elite to understand the nitty-gritty of the possible
complications and to accept the real cost, necessary e®orts and time scale toward this
scienti¯c progress is limited.
The general media successfully supported the hype and the layman could rightfully expect that, once the genomic text itself is known and made public, it can be
\read" and, in this way, its meaning be understood and exploited in applications.
Yet, it is well known that reading does not necessarily imply understanding. In the
context of the human genome, the contradiction translates into the question: What
are the biomolecular and cellular mechanisms that connect certain pieces of the
genome text with phenotypic e®ects?

2. To Which Extent Human Biology is Known at the Level
of Biomolecular Mechanisms?
The following is an attempt to provide a rough estimate to which extent we seem to
know this set of biomolecular mechanisms. About 25% of the human genome is taken
by protein-coding genes. Most of it is occupied by introns, just 1.5% of the genome
are actually protein-coding regions. Although the actual number is still a matter of
scienti¯c dispute, let us assume that there is, in total, about 23,000 genes.7
For how many genes, their biological function is known? Gene function is a
hierarchical notion involving many aspects of function at the molecular, cellular and
phenotypic levels.8,9 For interference into biological systems with predictable outcome, it is absolutely necessary to know the molecular and cellular functions of
genes/proteins to enable rational intervention into biomolecular mechanisms they
are involved in. The alternative would be just looking for statistical associations/
correlations between genome sequence features and phenotypic properties; yet, the
relationship between the two appears to be so complicated that even the whole
mankind's genomes might not provide su±cient data to clarify all aspects of it,
especially with regards to pleiotropic genes and to e®ects in°uenced by large numbers
of genes. Thus, without knowledge of biomolecular mechanisms and gene/protein
functions, ever faster and cheaper sequencing technology will only lead to the ever
faster accumulation of non-understood sequences.
For yeast, the most studied eukaryote organism with approximately 6000 genes,
there are about 1000 genes that were still listed as uncharacterized in Saccharomyces
Genome Database in 2007 (i.e. 10 years after full yeast genome sequencing10) and
this situation has essentially not changed ever since. Notably, many of these
uncharacterized genes have predicted functions11; yet, the respective experimental
follow-up is not moving much forward despite a large and internationally wellorganized yeast research community.
In humans, the situation is apparently grimmer than in the case of yeast. On the
positive side, there is a group of several thousand human genes and their derived
proteins that has been in the center of scienti¯c attention for a long time, typically
over many decades even before human genome sequencing, and their functions, such
as those of myosin and actin, lysozyme or p53, are quite well known. This block of
genes still attracts the bulk of biological research with a continuous °ood of scienti¯c
publications. Thus, the bulk of our biological knowledge (maybe, 99.99%) is related
to  1% of the human genome. For a number of previously uncharacterized genes
and proteins, their functions have been discovered during the last decade. Separin,12
SET domain methyltransferases,13 Eco1 acetyltransferase,14 kleisins,15 ATGL, the
adipocyte triglyceride lipase at the surface of lipid storage vesicles,16,17 ghrelin
octanoyltransferase,18 and the mec-17 methyltransferase for -tubulin19 are just
some illustrative examples (including a few more or less successful cases from the
author's past research). On the other hand, there are still about 10,000 human
proteins described as hypothetical in the NCBI protein database. Many other

proteins with hardly more precise descriptions cannot be considered functionally
characterized when, often with a length of 1000 amino acid residues or more (the
isoforms of NFAT520 being one example), the function of one domain with, maybe,
100200 amino acids, is known when the rest is unclear. For example, the molecular
function of the C-terminal macro domain of macroH2A (complementing the conformationally °exible N-terminal tail and the histone domain), namely binding of the
SirT1-metabolite O-acetyl-ADP-ribose,21,22 was only discovered in 2005. Hence, it
appears rather a lower estimate if we assume that roughly 10,00015,000 human
genes fundamentally require functional characterization, either to get an idea at all
what the gene/protein is about or to close knowledge gaps at the levels of molecular,
cellular or phenotypic function.
This estimate allows us also to guess how much of the human biology at the
molecular level is still unknown. With the function of 10,00015,000 genes/proteins
still obscured, this will translate into about a thousand protein-based pathways or
molecular machines yet to be discovered. Most likely, we do not know half or even
three-quarters of the human physiology at the level of biomolecular mechanisms,
indeed a truly discouragingly shaky starting point for any truly systems biology
approach at present.

3. When Will we Have Understood the Biomolecular
Mechanisms Encoded in the Human Genome?
Who carefully follows the scienti¯c literature notices that, not every week, a new
gene function is reported. Roughly estimating, we can conclude that the number of
newly characterized genes per year is about or below 100. Hence, linear extrapolation
gives us an estimate of a century until the functions of all protein-coding genes are
discovered, a time frame very much in line with the prognosis in Ref. 4.
Without diving into the topic of the RNA world with great detail, we need to
acknowledge that the nonprotein-coding part genome has also tremendous signi¯cance for physiology. There is undeniable evidence that the genome is pervasively
transcribed, also in regions that are not protein-coding.23 In most cases, the biological function of these short and long non-coding RNAs is enigmatic except for a
few cases; yet, they are known to in°uence a variety of important biological processes.24,25 Although many of these non-coding RNAs are certainly implicated in
transcription/translation and their regulation, it is tempting to assume some are
involved in metabolic or signaling, binding or enzymatic functions similar to proteins
given the experience from aptamers.26 Thus, maybe, a century is even not enough to
understand the human genome.
4. What Limits the Progress in Gene Function Discovery?
Why is the problem of discovering the genes' function so di±cult? The reports from
successful gene function discoveries show that no molecular function discovery has
come directly out of large-scale studies. At best, these studies helped to select genes for further analysis. Due to their speci¯c biological e®ects, the genes' functions are
individual a®airs that require creative, gene-speci¯c, tailored approaches that resist
generalized handling. Typically, there were computational biology-derived hypotheses9,27,28 about a gene function or candidate genes at the beginning of the discovery.
These hypotheses directed the experimental follow-up, ingeniously modi¯ed experiments using the existing arsenal of molecular and cell biology, biochemistry as well
as genetics and physiology of model organisms. It is this sequence of e®orts that has
¯nally delivered the breakthroughs. There is yet another aspect to a new gene
function discovery. With homology considerations and sequence pattern-function
correlations,9,2731 it is possible to extrapolate into the yet unknown part of the
genome and to narrow down the functions of several other, not yet functionally
characterized genes in the human and other genomes. Hence, the prospective value of
an experimental life science research project can be evaluated to which extent it has
potential to ¯nd a function for an uncharacterized gene and to which extent its
results allow to hypothesize functions for other, yet untouched parts of the genome.
Thus, it is probably more a combination of bioinformatics with old-fashioned
biochemistry and cell biology that will provide the bulk of insight into yet unknown
biomolecular mechanisms and gene/protein functions. As a rule, no principally new
technology needed to be developed.
If there is no technological barrier, maybe, there are issues with science organization, ¯nancing or incentives for scientists and administrators? One gene function
discovery requires the engaged work of one or several medium-sized research teams
over a period of about ¯ve years and with costs in the order of USD 10 million
(assigning 1 million per team per year and including some unsuccessful attempts).
A complete list of protein functions in the human genome would run into USD 100
billion, not an outrageous sum since it is comparable in order of magnitude with total
research spending of pharmaceutical industry per year (USD 65.3 billion in 2009
alone32 spent mostly on clinical trials that failed). Thus, gene function discovery is
also not primarily a ¯nancial problem. And what about the expensive datasets from
large-scale omics studies? Most likely, many of those will never be fully analyzed
since the data can be reproduced cheaper and with much higher accuracy with
methods that are currently in the process of development. It appears also improbable
that sequencing another 10,000 human individual human genomes in addition to the
already known 100033 will have great impact for biomolecular mechanism discovery;
even another magnitude of increase will hardly generate enough data to statistically
correlate genome variations with all types of phenotypic properties signi¯cantly
given the complexities of human biology.

5. Disruptive Events Breaking the Extrapolation: Science
and Technology Developments
It is unlikely that the linear extrapolation leading to a century of waiting until the
information hidden in the human genome becomes fully accessible will hold. History is nonlinear, and disruptive events are already on the horizon. A mixture of scienti¯c,
technological and social developments has the potential to redraw the rules of the
game. DNA sequencing is already the key research technology in life sciences. Most
importantly, DNA sequencing is becoming so inexpensive and accessible that, very
soon, sequencing will no longer be a prerogative for rich publicly or corporately
sponsored research institutes. The new Life Technology or Illumina sequencers to be
expected this or next year promise sequencing a human genome in 24 hours for
consumable costs of USD $1000 with an equipment pricing that is in the range for
people that can live without a second Ferrari.34 Thus, sequencing e®orts by quali¯ed
members of the civil society will become normal, ¯rst as services purchased, later
with own equipment in the side wing of the villa.
This single example exempli¯es a general, recent trend that research tool prices
(for many items of IT devices, lab consumables, etc.) are going down considerably.
Also notably, the new generations of laboratory equipment introduced at present
supersede the previous ones at a time point when the latter has not been intellectually exhausted and still can be used for making discoveries. For example, IT
capacity was a major limitation to computational biology research in the 1990s; it is
not a barrier any longer for most of the tasks, o®-the-shelf equipment is just ¯ne and
often better performing than necessary. Thus, the conditions for gentlemen's science
as in the 19th century are re-appearing.
6. Disruptive Events Breaking the Extrapolation:
Social Developments
The sheer availability of genome sequencing, combined with the curiosity of people to
learn about themselves, will make personal genomes widely available in the civil
society. With all the more a®luent part of the society having their personal genomes
on a thumbdrive in their pocket, they will naturally ask what kind of insight they
might gain from it for improving their lives. This will build an enormous pressure
from the side of demand. Once these people recognize that all the institutes for
systems biology are not giving them an answer, they will question why this happens,
only to discover the usual scenario, that PIs write grants, sit in committees and
meetings or do administrative activities within ine±cient structures instead of doing
science or they drop more long-term, risky projects for low hanging fruits to ensure a
continuous output of papers (in this context, going after yet another facet of a
functionally characterized gene instead of an uncharacterized gene function) that
keeps their careers alive (rather, their employment and economic survival). It might
be a research topic itself to clarify how much of the public resources and publicly
¯nanced working time actually goes into research and how much of it gets stuck in
\para-scienti¯c" activities of administering, evaluating, lobbying, communicating
and hunting after key performance indicators such as long publication lists.
The bureaucratization of academic science is not easy to change. The problem is
for the public hand in the process of fund allocation to decide (i) what is good science, (ii) what are acceptable time frames and outcomes and (iii) how well individual
researchers and teams perform and manage the challenges. This is far from trivial (if
not impossible) when the public hand has actually no vision (as commissions will
never take bold decisions), there are no good numerical parameters to measure and,
at the same time, the public science system has ballooned in size, and the internal
scienti¯c cleansing mechanisms based on intellectual pressure and reviews increasingly break down. The developed nations in the West have generated no other
answers than compounding ever more sophisticated bureaucratic mechanism for
control on top of each other (until, probably, science comes to a complete halt) and
there is no lack of evermore proposals for new structures to parasitize on the body of
science.35 Not surprisingly, scienti¯c publishing has returns that rival with those of
organized crime36 since high-impact journals are used as surrogate to evaluate scientists. Over the decades witnessed by the author (19832012 in various countries
and social systems), the issue has only aggravated. Possibly, there is no way for the
public hand to resolve the problems e±ciently.
Would every scientist really do the same research and publish the same stream of
papers if (s)he were rich enough to ¯nance the work out of own private funds? In the
economy, we are told that states are not good investors and private initiative has the
advantage of vision (and can absorb the risks without systemic consequences). Why
is this considered to be di®erent in science when the number of years, the lag between
e®ort and result is even much larger? The scienti¯c questions that can result in
productive research represent a thin layer between the known and the unknown and
their selection depends very much of the researcher's understanding of the state of
the art and her/his personal speci¯cs with regard to ideas, research technology and,
not to forget, intuition.
Not everybody needs to take an o±cial \cannot" for granted and wait since
there might be possibilities for financing alternatives privately. The same post
human-genome decade has also privatized and concentrated the growing total
wealth within a small part of society.37 Subsequently, some more, some less
reasonable civil society activities including nonprofit-oriented research in competition to the o±cial, public academic science will certainly arise. To note, the
problem of research evaluation in this context will collapse to the issue of scienti¯c
correctness, and private researchers will not need expensive high-impact journals
since they value the direct comment from quali¯ed colleagues after the report was
shared with them. Thus, it will be tested where research resources will produce the
greatest increment in scienti¯c insight. Although, at present, private initiative in
science is essentially restricted to the application side (foundations that want to
¯nd cures for diseases, etc.), it is not excluded and hopeless that the insight might
spread that basic research in cell division and cell di®erentiation mechanisms is the
key to cancer and other diseases or that epigenetics research might be more useful
for combating HIV and, possibly, other viral infections (for solidly suppressing the
virus genome incorporated into the human cells' genome) than developing vaccines
in the long term. Gene function and biomolecular mechanism discovery is a field
where private non-pro¯t initiative can show its advantages and have, at the same
time, a dramatic impact.
7. Conclusions
Pejoratively said, the first full human genome sequencing could be seen not so much
as a scienti¯c breakthrough as just a technical and organizational achievement of
applying some early, immature sequencing technology onto a very large, complicated
sequence target. Nevertheless, the author is convinced that, with hindsight, our
successors will hail the event of ¯rst full genome sequencing as a watershed event in
the history of science since, for the ¯rst time, a biological system was characterized
with exact data in its totality. What is missing in the genome is not in the biological
system; thus, we get an idea for the upper limit of cells' complexity and, in contrast to
previous eras, understand the size of the research task ahead. The basis for understanding the human genome is the knowledge of biomolecular mechanisms and the
discovery of functions of yet uncharacterized genes, proteins and RNAs is the central
task in life science research today. If the solution to this scienti¯c problem is
accompanied with a return of civil society into basic research, this will not have only
positive implications for science itself.


