Revisiting the concept of lineage in prokaryotes: a phylogenetic perspective
Abstract
Mutation and lateral transfer are two categories of processes generating genetic diversity in prokaryotic genomes. Their relative importance varies between lineages, yet both are complementary rather than independent, separable evolutionary forces. The replication process inevitably merges together their effects on the genome. We develop the concept of “open lineages” to characterize evolutionary lineages that over time accumulate more changes in their genomes by lateral transfer than by mutation. They contrast with “closed lineages,” in which most of the changes are caused by mutation. Open and closed lineages are interspersed along the branches of any tree of prokaryotes. This patchy distribution conflicts with the basic assumptions of traditional phylogenetic approaches. As a result, a tree representation including both open and closed lineages is a misrepresentation. The evolution of all prokaryotic lineages cannot be studied under a single model unless new phylogenetic approaches that are more pluralistic about lineage evolution are designed.

Diversity‐generating processes in prokaryotes
Prokaryotic lineages have traditionally been defined as “branches of the Tree of Life,” synonymous with monophyletic groups, embracing a last common ancestor and all the descendents that diverged from it through mutation. However, when lateral genetic transfer occurs, not all genes in a genome have the same ancestor. This poses serious challenges to how we define prokaryotic lineages. It questions the phylogenetic identity of a lineage and can lead to the proposal of artificially resolved prokaryotic trees, which can be misleading with respect to (i) their branching order and (ii) the meaning of the nodes in such trees. To address these issues, we need to describe the processes generating the genetic diversity in prokaryotes. Genomics and population genetics taught us that a surprising diversity of molecular mechanisms are involved in changing the genetic material of prokaryotes (Fig. 1A). They can all be grouped into two broad categories: mutation and lateral transfer.

Mutation
In the most general sense, a mutation is “any heritable change in DNA sequence.” This would obviously include changes acquired through lateral transfer, and its subprocess, intergenomic homologous recombination (Fig. 1A). However, here, as in most studies of mutation rates (using isolated organism or populations), only changes in the DNA sequence of a genome considered to have been inherited from a progenitor are classified as mutations.1, 2 The nature of such changes can vary, including base pair substitutions, insertion/deletion of one or more nucleotides, as well as larger or more complex changes (chromosomal rearrangement, gene duplication). The physical causes of mutations are also diverse, including unforced DNA replication errors, errors during proofreading or post‐replication mismatch repair, and DNA damage leading to replication errors or inaccurate repair.3

The process of mutation can be meaningfully defined at two different levels of biological organization: organism and population (Fig. 1B,C). At the organism level, mutation is a change in the nucleotide sequence of a genome without incorporation of genetic material from non‐progenitor cells, and its transmission to descendents after replication of the genome. The population level definition is similar but goes one step further, requiring propagation (and possible fixation) of an event in a population for it to be termed as mutation. At these two levels, selection plays an important role. A mutation must yield an organism that can replicate (organismal level selection) and selection, along with neutral drift, will determine the abundance of specific mutations in a population (population level selection).

Although mutation, by definition, is the only force responsible for de novo creation of genetic variation, it is not the only one introducing variation in particular groups or lineages of microbes. Genetic changes within an individual or a population can occur through the acquisition of DNA from individuals that are not an organism's direct cellular progenitor.

Lateral transfer
When genetic material from other cells is involved in changing the DNA sequence of a genome, the process can be termed lateral transfer.4 In prokaryotes, this process consists of two main steps. First, foreign DNA penetrates the cellular envelope in one of three ways: transformation, conjugation, or transduction (Fig. 1A). Second, integration into the new host genome is required, which can be achieved by either homologous recombination (recA‐dependent and legitimate, i.e., requiring some homology between the donor and recipient DNA), heterologous recombination (recA‐independent and illegitimate, i.e., not requiring homology between the donor and recipient DNA) or extrachromosomal maintenance and replication.

Lateral transfer can be defined at two biological levels of organization. At the organismal level, lateral transfer is described as the successful replication of a genome containing newly introduced DNA. Similarly to that of mutation, the population level definition of lateral transfer requires propagation (and possible fixation) of an event in a population. Selection determines whether an organism containing new genetic material can replicate (organismal level, Fig. 1B) and whether the gene acquisition/replacement will spread in the population (population level, Fig. 1C). For example, bacteria classified as Shigella arose multiple times independently from various Escherichia coli lineages, after the acquisition of pathogenic properties by lateral transfer of pathogenicity islands or plasmids. These laterally acquired elements spread in E. coli populations because they provided a selective advantage in human/animal hosts.5

The nature and relative importance of diversity‐generating processes varies between lineages
Mutation and lateral transfer provide the genetic diversity necessary for lineages to be created through the action of selection and drift on replicating organisms. This makes it critical to determine their relative importance across time and taxonomic diversity to define what lineages are.

Mutation
The first attempts to quantify processes generating genetic diversity were centered on mutations at the level of the organism. In the late 1990s, the rate of mutations per genome per replication (from experimental data on pure cultures of single organisms) was believed to be relatively conserved in bacteria, archaea, some viruses, and unicellular eukaryotes (between 0.0025 and 0.0046 mutations per genome per replication, meaning that one nucleotide substitution is likely to arise about every 300 genome replications).1, 6 However, these studies only included one bacterial prokaryote (E. coli), whereas more recent analyses on archaea such as the thermoacidophile Sulfolobus acidocaldarius and the halophile Haloferax volcanii revealed mutation rates that deviate from this range by 2‐ to 7.5‐fold.3, 7 The proportions of mutations that are base pair substitutions and those that are indels (insertions or deletions) also differ significantly in these archaea. While in other microbes with DNA genomes an average of 2/3 of mutations are base pair substitutions, Sulfolobus displays only 1/3 and Haloferax only 1/10.

A possibly more evolutionarily meaningful way of describing mutational rates would be to express them in terms of mutations per base pair per replication. In this case, mutation rates vary even more among prokaryotes, from ∼10‐ to 20‐fold.1 Such studies attempt to approximate, but do not provide, true neutral mutation rates, as culture under very non‐selective conditions is difficult (if not impossible). Also, they do not take into account mutational hotspots, transposon mobilization events and large genomic rearrangements, which vary significantly between organisms in terms of frequency and size.3 For example, in Orienta tsutsugamushi, 46.7% of the genome is occupied by repetitive sequences derived from an integrative and conjugative element, as well as various types of short repeats and transposable elements,8 which can drastically alter the rate at which a genome experiences mutation.

More recently, through the creation of large sequence datasets including multiple loci (genes) from numerous isolates, it has become possible to quantify some of the sources of genetic variation within microbial populations.9, 10 This technique, termed multi‐locus sequence typing (MLST), consists in sequencing ∼500 bp fragments of several unlinked genes in hundreds of closely related isolates, providing enough data for statistically significant estimation of post‐selection mutation rates for populations (Fig. 2). In contrast to the organismal rates described above for pure culture isolates, these take into account effective population sizes presumably found in nature. When expressed per gene segment per generation, population mutation rates have been found to vary up to ∼10‐fold between different bacterial lineages.11, 12 Notably, stress response to environmental conditions could increase mutation rates of certain populations, mostly through the activation of error‐prone polymerases.13

Lateral transfer
Lateral transfer also has some quantifiable aspects that have been shown to vary across lineages. Unlike mutation, however, it cannot be quantified for isolated organisms (clonal cultures). Indeed, lateral transfer requires divergent donors and recipients, and can only be quantified in populations of diverged microorganisms. Using MLST data and models related to those used for calculating population mutation rates, we can now obtain minimal lateral transfer estimates through quantification of intergenomic homologous recombination. The mathematical models currently used in population genetics can only take into account changes in genetic material that is present in all members of the population, therefore excluding acquisition of novel genetic material through heterologous recombination and as extrachromosomal elements. Population recombination rates therefore only include events based on recA‐dependent recombination. They have been found to be even more variable between lineages (∼1000‐fold) than population mutation rates and to be uncorrelated with the latter11 (Fig. 2).

Another aspect of lateral transfer that can be quantified is the amount of gene gain/loss experienced by different lineages. Signature and composition analysis of genome sequences found significant differences in the quantity of genes acquired by lateral transfer between different groups of bacteria and archaea.14 However, these analyses are limited to the detection of lateral transfer events from sources with different signature/composition biases and of relatively recent origin.

Phylogenetic approaches could be more powerful.15, 16 Taking into account the intragenomic creation of genetic material (gene duplication) as well as gene loss, some studies estimate rates at which genes are gained in specific lineages. Such rates have been proposed to vary significantly not only on large phylogenetic scales,17, 18 but also on a much finer scale, between closely related lineages. For a few free‐living genera for which multiple representative genomes have been sequenced (E. coli, Bacillus, Clostridium, and Streptococcus), these studies have concluded that the rates of gene gain and loss vary substantially (2‐ to 10‐fold) between different species and genera, as well as between strains of the same species.19-21 More reliable and meaningful fine‐scale estimates could be provided by the comparison of groups with similar levels of genetic diversity (in terms of sequence divergence), which do not necessarily match traditional species or genera. Such groups can be delineated by approaches identifying clonal complexes (isolates sharing a recent common ancestor), such as BURST (based upon related sequence types).22

Significant variability in rates of recombination and gene gain/loss is not surprising, given the variation in the distribution and properties of vectors facilitating the introduction of DNA into a cell. Plasmids, conjugative elements, and phages vary in size, have a variety of host ranges, and are more frequent in some lineages than in others.23, 24 Biological properties of prokaryotes can also influence the rate at which they take up DNA. For example, about 1% of prokaryotic species from divergent phyla are known to be able to take up DNA directly from the environment. Also, naturally transformable organisms can thus be constitutively (Neisseria gonorrhea) or selectively (most other prokaryotes).24, 25 Even once DNA has penetrated the cell, the presence/absence of different types of restriction/modification systems introduces variation in rates of lateral transfer.26 Some organisms also have the ability to create cytoplasmic bridges leading to cell fusion.27, 28 Others have the capacity to produce membrane vesicles carrying DNA,29 which could significantly increase the amount of lateral transfer they experience.

The presence of certain genetic elements in a genome (insertion sequences, repeat elements, integrons, transposons) can also affect the rate of foreign DNA incorporation, either directly (i.e., when they encode integrases or recombinases facilitating integration of DNA in the genome), or passively, their presence providing regions of homology for recombination between the chromosome and foreign DNA.24 For example, 10% of bacterial lineages harbor integrons on their chromosomes,30 genetic elements that facilitate the site‐specific integration of small mobile elements called gene cassettes through the activity of their integrases. Another factor that can strongly influence rates of lateral transfer is the presence of mutator cells in a prokaryotic population, which often have increased propensity to integrate divergent DNA in their genomes.31 The occurrence of mutators has been shown in several natural populations of pathogens and commensals (Proteobacteria and Firmicutes), with frequencies ranging from 0.1 to above 60%.31

Ecology is also likely to play an important role in the creation of genetic diversity in prokaryotes, because the environment influences the amount and nature of DNA that can be involved in lateral transfer, as well as the mechanisms available for its transport and acquisition (phage prevalence, half‐life of DNA outside the cell, population density, etc.). It seems highly plausible that, unless they evolved stronger protective exclusion mechanisms to prevent lateral transfer, organisms that share a habitat with many others are exposed to more DNA (quantitatively and qualitatively) and could have more diverse genomes than those thriving in taxonomically and ecologically simpler environments. For example, E. coli and Salmonella are free‐living enteric bacteria thriving in densely populated and diverse environments (human or animal guts). They are the closest free‐living relatives of Buchnera, an obligate intracellular symbiont living in specialized cells inside their aphid host. The former experienced about 2000‐fold more gene gain/loss and genome rearrangements than the latter, although they all have similar mutation rates.32

Overall, there are multiple sources, internal and external, of genetic diversity in prokaryotes (even in closely related ones) and it is not possible to discard all but one as trivial or secondary in our study of evolution. Studies that have compared population mutation and recombination rates in various prokaryotic lineages have found a relatively even split between those in which mutation introduces most of the changes and those in which intergenomic homologous recombination is responsible for most nucleotide variations.2, 33 These studies investigated the variation originating from nucleotide substitutions. However, lateral transfer also (if not predominantly) introduces changes through the acquisition of novel genetic material (intergenomic heterologous recombination). For example, strains of the nitrogen‐fixing soil bacteria Frankia that are more than 97% identical in their rRNA sequences—the conventional cutoff value for a bacterial species—can differ by as many as 3500 genes, which represents nearly half of their 7.5 Mb genome34 (see also Ref.35).

Mutation and lateral transfer are integrated through the replication process
Although fundamentally different in their initial causes, both mutation and lateral transfer depend on cellular replication to integrate the changes they create into a genome and/or a population, making them complementary and not independent forces.36

Yet, classically, mutation and lateral gene transfer have been treated separately, as if they were in conflict to determine how a cell would evolve. Acquisition of exogenous genetic material is termed “lateral” or “horizontal” inheritance; in contrast to “vertical” inheritance, which represents the acquisition of genetic material as a result of a genome replication event during the division of a cell. The term “vertical” is thus usually considered to include the mutations that are passed on to the progeny with genome replication.36 However, not only mutations, but also laterally acquired genetic changes, after having been replicated with the genome, are passed on to the progeny through vertical inheritance (Figs. 1B,C and 3). This overlap between vertical and lateral modes of inheritance naturally stems from their shared connection with DNA replication.

It raises major conceptual problems if we try to describe evolution as selection and drift acting on the genetic diversity created by the balance of two independent forces. This is the case with many phylogenomic studies,37, 38 which aim to distinguish between the impact of mutations and that of lateral transfer. As a result, they propose biased evolutionary scenarios, i.e., prokaryotic trees, whose branching order does not correspond to the complex evolutionary history. It is also the case for population genetic studies,10, 39 which attempt to quantify the respective importance of mutation versus lateral transfer as the origin of genetic variation in a lineage. Rather, these two processes overlap over time due to their mechanical dependence on genome replication.

Mutations are both caused by replication and require it for their propagation (Fig. 1A–C).1 For example, mutation occurs as a direct result of replication, when unforced replication errors are made by a DNA polymerase and are not corrected by proofreading activities of the mismatch repair system. Lateral transfer is also tightly connected to replication. The primary role of homologous recombination, although this process is often involved in the acquisition of exogenous DNA, is indeed the completion of DNA replication.40 Likewise, the heterologous recombination of DNA acquired in the single‐stranded form with a prokaryotic genome requires replication. Some examples include the site‐specific insertion of certain prophages and mobile elements known as integron gene cassettes.41, 42 Finally, the same molecular apparatus is responsible for controlling both mutation and lateral transfer, ensuring the accuracy of DNA replication and limiting homologous recombination. Indeed, the mismatch repair system eliminates biosynthetic errors during DNA replication and prevents homologous recombination between divergent DNA sequences.31

After changes have been replicated, they get passed on to progeny by vertical inheritance, regardless of their origins. Therefore, replication inevitably creates a synthesis of the changes introduced by mutation and lateral transfer, integrating in the prokaryotic genome the two different categories of processes that create genetic variation. The succession of these replication cycles—the continuous link in cellular histories—creates composite lineages, holding together genes of intragenomic and extragenomic origins.43

Integration of genetic changes originating through mutation and lateral transfer by replication: consequences for the definition of prokaryotic lineages
The synthetic effect of DNA replication, integrating mutations and lateral acquisitions in microbial genomes, has major implications for the genesis of microbial lineages and consequently on how we define them.

The end of a naïve “clonal” view of lineages
Retracing the pedigree of an organism seems quite straightforward for a clonally reproducing prokaryote acquiring changes only through internal processes (i.e., modification of its DNA sequence by mutation). Changes are passed on when the organism divides and its descendents inherit its genome with the acquired changes, forming cellular histories that can be represented as bifurcating branches. In that case, the genesis of phylum appears tree‐like and lineages can be defined as “branches of the Tree of Life” (monophyletic groups).

Yet, the genesis of a phylum can also be more than a series of splits (when it includes genetic accretions), prompting alternative concepts of prokaryotic lineages. For example, a rope metaphor was suggested by G. Olsen. The different fibers composing the rope are analogous to the individual genes composing the genomes of organisms within a line of descent giving it its consistency although no single fiber needs to persist throughout the entire rope for it still to be continuous (cited in Zhaxybayeva et al.44). According to this model, lineages connect discrete genetic entities, co‐replicated for some time period and possibly of different origins. Under this definition, there is no guarantee that a lineage's past and extant genetic characteristics are homologous, because of extensive potential for gene flow. To stress the evolutionary significance of this alternative lineage model, we introduce two special types of prokaryotic lineages.

Toward a “pluralistic” view of lineages: open and closed lineages
While it is common practice for biologists to classify organisms in lineages, not all organisms have evolved exclusively from one vertical line of descent since the time of their initial divergence. The process of replication could result in at least two very different types of lineages, depending on the predominant source of their genetic variation (mutation or lateral transfer) over evolutionary time. In some lineages, phylogenetic changes from external sources accumulate over time, involving many distinct contributors, which challenges such a tree‐like conception of evolution. Due to repeated gene transfer (and despite continuity in cell division from one generation to the next) such lineages undergo a progressive change in their phylogenetic identity. They are chimeras‐in‐progress, which are impossible to describe in the traditional phylogenetic framework beyond a certain number of changes.

Over long evolutionary periods, for some prokaryotic lineages the cumulative number of molecular changes due to external sources is in excess over that resulting from internal sources. We call such lineages, whose genomes have accumulated over time a majority of changes of foreign origin, and for which a majority of the constitutive genes do not show a common pattern of vertical inheritance, “open” lineages. These are, however, only temporarily evolving like genuine lineages. Only when considered over a limited evolutionary time scale (i.e., t1 in Fig. 3), the cell division history of open lineages does match the transmission of most of their genome. Importantly, when studied over a larger number of generations, by definition open lineages lose this property. The lineages still exist, as a consequence of the successive replications of genomes over time, but the various cellular histories of their parts mostly diverge from one another. These phylogenies depart from a simple line of descent, since open lineages have accumulated traces of not one simple line of diversification and descent, but of many.

Taken cumulatively, the excess of external changes over internal ones triggers a phenomenon of “phylogenetic change”; e.g., over a timescale t2, the phylogenetic signal of open lineages switches, and is largely discordant with the phylogenetic signal present at t1 (Fig. 3). Concretely, this accumulation of an excess of lateral signal can happen in many ways: (i) when the lineage has acquired more changes (new nucleotide positions) overall by laterally gaining genes than through accumulated substitutions in its vertically transmitted genes; (ii) when it has accumulated more nucleotide substitutions through recombination than through mutation in core genes; or (iii) when both (i) and (ii) have occurred simultaneously.

Importantly, all these molecular changes can result from the ongoing action of biological processes, and it is arbitrary to retain some of these characters as describing the bona fide phylogenetic position of open lineages. Placing an open lineage as a branch in a tree would be equivalent to choosing some subset of a population's genetic history to represent it as a whole. It would require an ontological debate to decide which molecular changes to retain as informative, which supposes an a priori decision over which part of the evolutionary history deserves to be reported in systematics. The ontological priority traditionally attributed to vertical changes over lateral ones cannot be justified by consideration of the biological process. In open lineages, the lateral signal is no less a part of the evolutionary history of a lineage than are mutations, since genetic changes of these two sources are both naturally integrated by replication. To us, it is more reasonable to argue that open lineages have no unique anchoring point in a tree, since most of their evolution was not tree‐like.

By contrast, we use the term “closed” lineages for those whose genomes have been in majority evolving by mutation, adapting a basal set of lineage‐specific, vertically transmitted genes (Fig. 3). They trace cell, genome, and population descent and divergence. Of course, this is a sliding scale, and no real lineage would be purely “open” or “closed.” Whether a lineage is “open” or “closed” also depends on the timescale at which it is described. For example, frequent lateral transfer takes places between different strains of the Legionella pneumophila species (the causative agent of Legionnaire's disease).45 However, one particular monophyletic group within that species (strain Paris) is mostly clonal despite being distributed worldwide. Nonetheless, it is important to distinguish these two case figures (“open” and “closed” lineages) to establish the impact of having a substantial contribution of lateral transfer to genetic diversity on current phylogenomic practices (the inference of phylogenetic relationships and evolutionary mechanisms from genomic data).46

Revisiting the definition of prokaryotic lineages requires changes in the phylogenomic practice
Open and closed lineages are based on equally natural processes, but their evolution cannot be studied under a single scheme without high risks of phylogenetic errors. Recalling some basic principles of phylogenetics helps clarifying why different evolutionary models are needed to study their evolution. The Tree of Life, whose branches correspond to evolutionary lines of descent, and whose branching order is supposed to reflect the natural relationships between lineages and species, is reconstructed under an assumption that is by definition untrue for open lineages and only valid for closed ones. This assumption is inspired by the cladistic logic and the distinction between homology and homoplasy.

Typically, for a matrix of characters, a true tree can only be built when homology (the true common historical signal) exceeds homoplasy (the non‐historical “alternative” phylogenetic signal, either artificial or due to convergences/parallelisms/hybridizations, etc.). To reconstruct a best phylogenetic tree, one thus has to consider that homoplasy (i.e., such as the signal caused by lateral genetic change) is by default rarer than homology (vertical changes caused by mutation) in a dataset.47 This means that the identity between sequences is a priori explained by verticality. However, when shared characteristics necessarily reflect some combination of lateral and vertical inheritance, or when the vertical signal is a minority signal, no true tree can be easily reconstructed.49, 50 In such cases, cladistic logic does not apply (homoplasy is in excess with respect to homology) and phenetic methods run a high risk of proposing relationships supported by non‐historical signals.

Furthermore, open and closed lineages do not seem to occupy different segments of the prokaryotic tree, with all the open lineages on one side and all the closed lineages on another. Both open and closed lineages are patchily distributed across prokaryotic diversity (Fig. 2). For instance, Bacilli such as Staphylococcus aureus have been shown to have an almost clonal population structure while other members of this bacterial class, such as Streptococcus pneumoniae, experience high rates of recombination (Fig. 2).48 Although sampling can bias the estimation of population mutation rates, the number of cases in which these rates are found to vary substantially across traditional lineages is increasing rapidly.33 Thus, studying open and closed lineages together using a traditional phylogenetic methodology can lead to reconstruction of confusing trees that do not truly reflect the vertical relationships between lineages. Some evolutionists, eager to build the Tree of Life, despite such adverse conditions, argue that it would still be worth discovering even a minority of strictly vertically transmitted genes, for which we had some confidence that the vertical signal exceeds the lateral signal.51 This logic, however, has a major weakness. It denies that the majority of the gene phylogenies could then disagree with the tree reconstructed on such a minority of characters.

Some authors go even further in the search of a criterion to separate homology from homoplasy in prokaryotic genes to avoid the errors caused by lateral gene transfer in phylogenomic inferences.37 Although they admit that “if the evolution of genetic material was primarily governed by processes other than species divergence, then the notion of a species tree would be of little, if any, empirical value,”37 they paradoxically claim that “the species tree could still be a useful concept even if incongruent with every gene tree.”37 They propose a mathematical trick to distinguish homologous characters from homoplastic ones, in the assumed case where lateral gene transfer would affect prokaryotic species randomly. In this case, the vertical signal would then no longer be the dominant phylogenetic signal, but the average one, and the mean phylogenetic signal of the many incongruent markers would fortunately correspond to the vertical history of species. By contrast, the variance in the phylogenetic dataset would, equally fortunately, correspond to non‐vertical (homoplastic) evolutionary changes.37 That way, all the genes, whatever their phylogenetic history is, could contribute to the reconstruction of a species tree.

Yet, although there is no doubt that an average signal can always be computed from a gene dataset, such assumptions are naïve. First, there is little reason to believe that lateral gene transfer is a random process. Second, there is no reason at all to assume that the average signal of genes reflects a pure vertical signal since replication inevitably mixes together both internal and external sources of genetic variation (Figs. 1A and 3). Finally, it is unlikely that the average signal of incongruent genes corresponds to the species tree history, as all these disagreeing genes do not coalesce in a last common ancestor. For example, three E. coli isolates (uropathogenic strain CFT073, enterohemorrhagic strain EDL933, and laboratory strain MG1655) have been found to share only ∼40% of their combined (non‐redundant) set of protein‐coding genes.52 At this low taxonomical level, already, an average signal would not reflect a true and meaningful phylogenetic position.

The distinction between open and closed lineages could thus be decisive to better describe prokaryotic evolution. Typically, closed lineages are amenable to classical phylogenetic analyses. They can be placed on a tree, and their evolution can generally be studied in majority using the tree‐thinking logic.53 To a certain extent, the history of these “simple” lineages can be inferred using their core genomes. Some hypotheses regarding their ancient characteristics can be proposed with reason, which is one of the traditional goals of phylogenetics. Open lineages, on the other hand, display a majority of genetic changes from various origins. For such lineages, in the long run, vertically inherited markers constitute a minority signal amongst others. Their evolution cannot be modeled accurately nor relevantly using the classical model. There is no such thing as one last common ancestor for them, but rather populations of diverse ancestors, which contributed multiple genes and signals to the lineage over time. For these open lineages, long‐term retrodiction is much harder: the biology of the hypothetical ancestor of a lineage had little to do with the biology of its actual members. (This is the case for 15 out of 16 prokaryotic lineages investigated in Dagan et al.,43 since only the Chlamydiae, with 49 ± 15% of their genes originating from lateral gene transfer, could possibly be a closed lineage.)

Pretending that open lineages preserved some sort of lineage‐specific genetic essence would be overly simplistic. Instead, another logic, which is not inspired by tree thinking, is required to deal with their complex history. The recent development of network methodologies, taking into account the whole gene content of a set of microorganisms and providing some well‐characterized mathematical properties of their relationships,43 could constitute an interesting first step to define such evolutionary units. In principle, networks of genes in which edges represent the preferred connections between the genes presenting similarities in their phylogenetic histories (i.e., common subtrees in their best trees, common support for a given series of test topologies, etc.) could be used. These networks could help to evaluate whether the genes comprised in a given genome, or in a given lineage, evolved mostly similarly or not.

Building such a network requires a trustworthy matrix of phylogenetic distance between genes, but unlike the tree representation, it does not a priori discard any of inconsistent phylogenetic signals between markers. It would be a good way to “let genes fall where they may” in the gene network to check whether these connections match the admitted boundaries of various evolutionary units. Notably, it could help describing a collection of integrated genes of diverse phylogenetic origins that are co‐replicated over a certain time period within a cellular line of descent. The degree of openness of a lineage—and the relevance of its inclusion in a tree—could then be quantified by evaluating how many of its constituent genes are more connected to others outside the a priori defined lineage. Questions could also be asked about the most likely—not necessarily vertical—processes that have directed the evolution of these genes and of that lineage, and the most likely vectors/biological mechanisms (integrons, phages, plasmids, etc.) that have contributed to these changes. In particular, it would be informative to propose a biological meaning (i.e., functional/ecological rather than taxonomical54) to some of the edges within such a network, as is often done for specific clades in a phylogenetic tree.55

Conclusion
The variety of processes generating genetic diversity and the integrative property of the replication process have far‐reaching consequences for the general concept of lineage. Lineages of prokaryotes are created by a plurality of evolutionary processes, which can differ in their intensity and nature between given lineages. For this reason, a single model accounting for the genesis of phyla, by default assuming the dominance of mutation over lateral transfer, cannot be universally applied to all microbes. Failure to acknowledge that replication might eventually lead to very different lineages over time (more disparate or more homogeneous in their origins) might mislead our inferences regarding the past. It seems necessary to give lineages temporal boundaries, as levels of mutation and lateral transfer vary through time and can differ from deep nodes to more recent ones. It seems also desirable that evolutionists become pluralist regarding lineage definition. This conclusion should not come as a surprise: after all, many of us have already become pluralist regarding species definitions, and lineages represent lines of related species or related organisms within a species. It would be odd that the former evolutionary unit (the lineages) should be treated in a uniform manner, while the latter one (species) is currently more carefully dealt with.56, 57

