Does the ‘Ring of Life’ ring true?
In a recent stimulating paper, Rivera and Lake applied a new phylogenetic method to study the evolution of genomes, which challenges the classical representation of the Tree of Life. Acknowledging the evolutionary importance of lateral gene transfer, they used the conditioned genome approach to reconstruct the Tree of Life, and in the end proposed a Ring of Life. They explained that the Ring of Life structure is a result of a single fusion event between two prokaryotic genomes at the base of the eukaryotic tree, probably between the ancestors of a photosynthetic bacterium and an archaeon. Because this constitutes an important conclusion with regards to the evolutionary process and origin of the eukaryotic cell, their work deserves further attention before these conclusions can be accepted. Here we question the reconstruction and the meaning of the Ring of Life. In addition to general problems associated with gene-content-based phylogenetic analyses, we discuss some implicit premises and potential weaknesses of the conditioned genome method and conclude that, although Rivera and Lake's conclusions might be right, they have not been established by their current approach.

Introduction
Recently, Rivera and Lake [1] published a novel gene content method, known as conditioned reconstruction, for reconstructing the Tree of Life. The authors then used conditioned reconstruction to investigate the evolutionary relationships between a selection of eight genomes representative of the three domains of life: Archaea, Bacteria and Eukarya [2]. The process of conditioned reconstruction rests on the similarities between gene and genome sequences. Analogous to aligned gene sequences that consist of a succession of nucleotides, Rivera and Lake [2] propose a ‘genome sequence’ and genomic alignments based on two character states: gene presence (P) or absence (A). During gene evolution the character state of a nucleotide position changes by nucleotide substitution or deletion. Similarly, during genome evolution the character state of an orthologous gene would alternate between presence and absence. A genome alignment can be used to reconstruct the evolutionary history of genomes by inferring probabilities of gene loss and gain by Markov methods. Because such methods only describe the probability of change between character states, no information on the mechanisms of gene loss or gain [i.e. gene duplication, deletion and lateral gene transfer (LGT)] is included. No information about LGT is coded in the genomic alignment and therefore ‘…any method that can properly model genomic evolution will be invariant to the confounding effects of LGT…’ [1]. Conditioned reconstruction is advocated as such a method, and Rivera and Lake claim that reconstructing a Tree of Life is still possible even in the presence of extensive LGT.

In spite of its promising title, ‘Deriving the genomic Tree of Life in the presence of horizontal gene transfer: conditioned reconstruction’, the paper by Lake and Rivera [1] does not address the phylogenetic concerns raised by frequent recurrent LGT. Notably, the main problem that Rivera and Lake suggests is posed by LGT is that it has ‘…the potential to erase much of the history of life that has been recorded in DNA…’ [1]. Such a view that the consequence of LGT is mostly an introduction of noise into phylogenetic reconstructions neglects a deeper issue. Indeed, in the view of many authors, the reason why LGT challenges the reconstruction of the Tree of Life is because LGT has played as significant a role in vertical inheritance during the history of life 3, 4, 5. Several authors insist that LGT is an essential aspect of the history of life rather than just an ‘eraser’ of phylogenetic signal. By contrast, gene loss is more likely to erase phylogenetic signal than LGT 6, 7, 8, 9. Because the tree-like pattern reflects a strict process of vertical inheritance, the existence of LGT theoretically forbids the reconstruction of an organismal tree based on genes. More than being invariant to the confounding effects of LGT, a proper model of genome evolution should instead incorporate these effects. In the presence of LGT, webs of life or syntheses would be expected [10]. Thus, Rivera and Lake appear to have found a novel conceptual angle to propose a Tree of Life even in an assumed context of LGT. We argue that this is not the case.

A proposed benefit of the conditioned reconstruction algorithm is that it can identify genome fusion events, which are defined as the rapid union of two disparate genomes [1]. When applied to the three domains of life [2], Rivera and Lake's analyses suggest the ancestral eukaryotic genome originated from the fusion of two prokaryotic genomes, one an ancestor of a proteobacterium/photosynthetic bacterium and the other an ancestor of a crenarchaeon (eocyte). In this commentary, we try to clarify several assumptions of Rivera and Lake's approach so that further readers will understand the origin of their results. We will try to establish the origin of the ring, because Rivera and Lake finally propose a Ring of Life when massive LGT occurs. We will show that the Ring of Life might be an additional metaphor to depict evolution, rather than a real natural classification scheme, and that the Ring of Life's temporal polarization requires additional hypotheses for the fusion conclusion to be satisfied.

The conceptual load of the ring
The conditioned genome method is based on a debatable analogy between a gene sequence and a so-called ‘genome sequence’ [1]. Indeed, it is arguable up to which point a gene in a genome is equal to a nucleotide site in a gene. Sites within a given gene are logically ordered and the number of possible character states is defined by the genetic code (A, T, C or G). The character state of genes might change for a given site because the gene evolves, but the number of possible character states is finite. Lake and Rivera's analogy [1] supposes that the presence or absence of a gene in a genome is as definable as A, T, C and G. However, presence and absence are at best imprecise categories, because in contrast to A, T, C and G, gene sequences undergo modification. Consequently, the assumption that the genome is composed of a single primary sequence that mutates between A state and P state could risk being too conservative. However, the use of gene presence or absence for phylogenetic objectives is a general issue of gene-content-based methods and has been argued to be a relatively weak tool to study prokaryote phylogeny per se[8]. Gene content analyses appear to perform more poorly than other genome tree approaches, even if they do produce interesting results [8]. Notably, genome size is one of the potential factors confounding gene presence/absence patterns [11]. Rivera and Lake realized this and carefully explored the potential for genome size and gene order to bias their conclusions and they applied the appropriate filters to reduce the risk of artifact in their favoured set of topologies. The result of their analysis on eight broadly distributed species appears to be free of the big genome artifact 1, 2.

In any case, the genome sequence is probably much more flexible than the gene sequence and the possibility of genes being passed among genomes by frequent LGT and lost by deletion means sites within the genome sequence are recurrently being added and removed [7]. Entities that are usually identified as being ‘the same’ gene show much less length variation across all life than do genome sequences. This fact leads to the question of how many and which possible sites should be considered in describing a genome sequence. It appears improbable that such a genome sequence could be compared at the scale of all life. To deal with this issue, Lake and Rivera consider genomes as ‘bands of gene fibers’ and introduce a central tool: the ‘conditioning genome’ [1]. This ‘conditioning genome’ itself is not a genuine biological concept. It aims to provide a reference to compare all the genomes together by listing a priori the possible number and character states of ‘sites’ (fibers) (i.e. the set of bona fide core genes evolving in the genomes). Furthermore, this ‘…conditioning genome may be located anywhere…’ [1] in the Tree of Life. Clearly, this a priori reference genome is more a tool of the method than a real biological structure and is therefore problematic because such an ideal ubiquitous genome has no reason to exist all over the tree, for billions of years, since the beginning of life [12]. We claim that the genome of the last common ancestor is probably not a representative subcase of the conditioning genome on which this method is based. Extant prokaryotic genomes are not extant eukaryotic genomes. That is why the use of such an essential genome, with a restricted number of sites, as if the gene pool had been forever the same, is not a free assumption. More realistically, a given genome exists at time t only, and it evolves, for instance adding new genes by multiple LGTs or by new gene creation: the diameter of the band moves as well as the definition of fibers. Obviously, Lake and Rivera acknowledge this and detail a series of events (duplications, multiple gains or losses of copies) that cannot be taken into account by their model [1].

Unfortunately, we feel this current model runs the risk of misrepresenting LGT. The authors explain that ‘…the use of a conditioning genome affects the definitions of all four of the joint probabilities state considered in our two-genome example (i.e. it affects the PP, PA, AP and AA probabilities)…’ [1]. This suggests that, at least in principle, the conditioning genome can introduce a bias into the phylogenetic relationships inferred between organisms. For example, if the conditioning genome itself was composed of many genes acquired by LGT from genomes outside the current investigation, then its use as a reference could artificially introduce a long list of absences in genomic sequences otherwise not closely related. Conversely, if this conditioning genome was less prone to the effects of LGT then many LGT events between the genomes under investigation will go unidentified.

There are additional reasons for concern that LGT will be underestimated by the conditioned reconstruction method. Either a gene is already part of the conditioning genome and then the presence/absence pattern is tautologically reported on a tree, or it is outside, and then it is not taken into account. Lake and Rivera write:
If a new gene is horizontally transferred into a genome and corresponds to a gene that is not present in the conditioning genome, then it will not affect the coloring [white for A, grey for P] of the band since there will be no fiber corresponding to this gene […] if a second copy of a gene is acquired by HGT [LGT], that copy, likewise, will not affect the coloring. Finally, as previously discussed, the source of an acquired gene is not coded and, hence, is irrelevant. [1].

They can hardly claim that they have really proposed a solution that takes LGT into consideration and draws a tree [1]. We believe this misrepresentation of LGT could lead to the incorrect proposition of a single genome fusion event and, accordingly, the Ring of Life.

Conditioned reconstruction: single genome fusion versus multiple independent LGTs
When applied to the relationships between the three domains of life, the conditioned reconstruction method proposes a series of trees, ranked according to their bootstrap support [2]. Initially, this method is not designed to draw a ‘webby web’ (i.e. a tree with many horizontal links), because the many trees supported by only a minority of the data will remain undetected. Multiple, but unique, events are not represented by Rivera and Lake's current approach. As a matter of fact, they take for granted that multiple independent transfers of various origins will hardly produce a consistent signal strong enough to support one of the best trees. They make the implicit assumption that the probability of obtaining a phylogenetic signal is a function of the number of genes transferred. Consequently, they claim that their method is able to distinguish between a unique genome fusion event and several regular slow LGTs [1]. However, we seriously doubt this is really true. In their Nature paper [2], Rivera and Lake are not able to decide whether or not they have identified the well-documented regular transfer of genes from the mitochondrion to the nucleus. Indeed, Martin and Embley [13] underlined that conditioned reconstruction cannot discriminate this signal from that of the primordial fusion event involving an eocyte and a bacterium. It is thus arguable whether Rivera and Lake can differentiate between regular piecemeal transfers and a single unique fusion. To us, multiple recurrent transfers from a given genomic source or from other related members of a lineage represented in this study can produce a pattern of presence/absence similar to that of a genome fusion (Figure 1). In addition, Rivera and Lake explain that extensive LGT observed among prokaryotes can obscure the identities of those prokaryotes that might have contributed genes to eukaryotes [2]. Therefore, there is an important potential source of artifact: distinguishing between genome fusion events and multiple independent transfer events is virtually impossible.

The Ring of Life, taken as evidence for a single genomic fusion, is thus only one possible interpretation of the recovery of multiple simultaneously supported incongruent trees. Rivera and Lake [1] theoretically illustrate the outcome of a genome fusion event and describe two incongruent, but compatible, informative patterns of presence/absence (namely PAAP and AAPP) that can be used to reconstruct the fusion event, by supporting a ring-like phylogenetic structure. They assume that ‘the total genomic’ content of the two organisms in fusion is passed to the new organism, which makes us prone to consider that the support for both incompatible topologies will be strong. However, in their presentation of evidence favouring a fusion pattern, Lake and Rivera ignore the probabilities of at least two informative patterns characteristic of a non-fusion event: PAPA and APAP. An estimation of these probabilities would provide an estimate of the degree of homoplasy in the data and therefore of data in contradiction with the genome fusion hypothesis. Consequently, we feel that Rivera and Lake were mostly interested in choosing between two dominant outputs: either a single well-supported tree or, in the case of multiple simultaneously supported trees, a ring, symptomatic of a genome fusion. We feel that the authors do not want to stress on potential conflicting data, but prefer instead to try to reconcile the data to a single event.

The proposition of a Ring of Life was based on the observation of the five best trees reconstructed using the conditioning genome, not on the statistical distribution of presence/absence patterns. The authors suggest that these different trees are actually compatible if one imagines that the true unique relationships between organisms constitute a ring. However, under this theoretical scenario, the data are not conflicting and no tree is expected to be better than any of the other four trees. Roughly, the five trees depicting the same evolutionary history should all receive similar support from the data, and they do not. When conditioned on Archaeoglobus fulgidus, Rivera and Lake recover a single tree supported by 60.5% of the total bootstraps and a second, third, fourth and fifth best tree that are supported by only 16.8%, 10%, 7.2% and 1.8% of the bootstraps, respectively. Such a huge discrepancy in the respective supports of these trees suggests that at least a portion of the data are conflicting, a situation expected, for instance, in the presence of numerous LGTs in the prokaryotic world. When Rivera and Lake conclude that the Ring of Life is supported by 96.3% bootstraps, they are referring to a cumulative bootstrap value, which might be hiding as much conflict as it claims to resolve. Typically, in the trees with minor bootstrap values, support for the monophyly of the euryarchaeota and the eukaryotes is always recovered, whereas the relationships between the remaining taxa are conflicting, as illustrated in Figure 2. For instance, if one uses Rivera and Lake's best tree (60.5% bootstrap) rooted between the prokaryotes and eukaryotes as a reference, it is clear that Rivera and Lake's data do support a close relationship between eukaryotes, a crenarchaeon and a proteobacterium, which is indeed compatible with an endosymbiotic origin of eukaryotes. However, a ring is not absolutely required to exhaust all the phylogenetic information present in the five unequally supported, conflicting trees. In an assumed context of LGT, when the minority trees were contrasted with the best tree to infer LGT scenarios that were then mapped on to this reference tree in the most parsimonious manner, we observed that many lateral transfers were inferred from Rivera and Lake's five best trees (Figure 2). The Ring of Life is therefore only one interpretation amongst several.

Interpreting the Ring of Life
Favouring the majority report and ignoring potential conflicts in the data, Rivera and Lake reach the conclusion that the Tree of Life is actually a Ring of Life: ‘…the data are not tree-like, they are ring-like’ [2], a ‘radical departure from conventional thinking…’ [13]. The output also appears to be independent of the choice of conditioning genome. The use of Archaeoglobus or Staphylococcus genomes leads to the same conclusion regarding the chimerical nature of eukaryotes, a notion previously discussed in other works 14, 15, 16, 17. Reading such a circular diagram might have been tricky, but Rivera and Lake propose an elegant test to discriminate ‘fusion’ from ‘non-fusion’ organisms. If fusion organisms are removed from the ring, it would open the ring and convert it into a tree, because a fusion organism ‘…necessarily contacts two nodes of a ring…‘ [2]. However, so too does the root of the ring. That is why we might wonder what would happen if the organism identified as the fusion organism was in fact harboring a large ancestral genomic state? In this case, removing the root of the ring would also convert the ring into a tree. Thus, with the ring and this open/closure condition test only, eukaryotes might as well be ancestral-like than derived. Bacteria and archaea would have resulted from independent genomic reductions from a common stock. In other words, the Ring of Life in itself is not enough to affirm that eukaryotes result from the mix of two prokaryotic genomes, prokaryotes might still be eukaryotic fragments. Eukaryotes would still appear chimerical. Exterior knowledge and conditions are required to decide if the fusion organism identified by this approach is derived (at the tip) or ancestral (at the root of the ring). Coupled with the assumption that fusion organisms are not ancestral, but derived, the Ring of Life can be temporally polarized – maybe the word ‘rooted’ should be given up with the metaphor of the tree. Indeed, Rivera and Lake assume that a big genome was not the ancestral condition and that evolution by genome fusion is more likely than evolution by genome fission. Unfortunately, they also claim in their supplementary discussion that this decisive premise cannot be tested by their approach. According to them, ‘…eukaryotic genomes cannot be used for conditioning…’ [2]. If they are right, it means that, for methodological reason only, a eukaryotic root for the Ring of Life could never be proposed by their approach. In any case, this constitutes an important bias. To be used as a natural classification framework, as Rivera and Lake advocate in their supplementary discussion [2], the Ring of Life would require that conditioned reconstruction accurately described most of the biological evolution at the genomic level. By contrast, conditioned reconstruction is more an idealist concept of biological evolution at this stage.

Finally, from this Ring of Life, Rivera and Lake claim that a genome fusion between a photosynthetic eubacterium/proteobacterium and an archaeal eocyte gave rise to the first eukaryotes. However, if this ring and its rooting are embraced, the precise identities of the prokaryotes involved in these fusion/massive transfer events remains to be established. Clearly, more prokaryotic species would be required to assess that all the eubacterial/archaeal genes come from a single genome. At this stage, it is unclear whether the eubacterial-eukaryotic cenancestor was an ancestor of an α-proteobacterium, a γ-proteobacterium or a cyanobacterium. The respective times of the chloroplast acquisition and the mitochondrial acquisition are thus left undecided.

Concluding remarks
Although seductive at first, one might doubt whether the evolution of life, at least in respect to the data presented by Rivera and Lake, was really more ring-like than web-like. Rivera and Lake's conclusions could very well be true, but they are debatable as they are possibly an artifact of the conditioned reconstruction method and/or an over-interpretation. First, the reconstruction of a Ring of Life, characteristic of a single fusion between two prokaryotic genomes, is only one interpretation of Rivera and Lake's incongruent trees. Because the conditioned reconstruction acts as a filter, excluding the evolutionary history of many genes probably affected by LGT, the information of poorly supported trees is vastly ignored. Furthermore, the majority trees would be expected in the case of multiple independent gene transfers from several prokaryotic origins, even in the absence of a single genome fusion event. Second, we feel the proposition that prokaryotes predated eukaryotes still deserves to be demonstrated, especially if prokaryotes are not monophyletic. Certainly, the hypothesis of a genomic fusion raises some biological questions, not addressed by Rivera and Lake. Indeed, the current analysis provides little insight into the appearance of the nucleus. In brief, the presence of a nucleus is probably not neutral for the physical realization of genome fusion, however, it might be less of a barrier to a slow trickle of genes, by way of LGT. The likelihood of a successful fusion really depends on the morphological features of the hypothetical eubacterial-eukaryotic and eocytic-eukaryotic cenancestors, in addition to their phylogenetic relationships. If one of them was already nucleated 18, 19, the claims that prokaryotes predated nuclear carrier [20] would be premature. Also, if the prokaryotic genomes of the fusion partners were themselves piecemeal (e.g. carried on a chromosome and several megaplasmids), a unique fusion event between all these genomic bits might be even less likely. Answers to these biological concerns could have consequences on one's agreement with the genome fusion postulated at the base of the Ring of Life. Consequently, we would like to remind readers that the ring could well be an over interpretation resulting from the use of a conditioning genome as a reference tool to reconstruct a potential tree. We would also like to stress that this approach unfortunately does not really solve the phylogenetic problem raised by LGT. Either it severely restricts the impact of LGT or, following the majority report logic, it turns them into apparent impressive genome fusion events, specifically if the prokaryotic root is accepted. Perhaps, a finer scale representation based on the ring methodology could be attempted if the inferred succession of presence/absence for a given gene in lineages through time could be incorporated into the Ring of Life picture. The inside of the ring could be colored like a chess board showing the succession of presence/absence in gene lineages instead of being all white. In this way, even single LGTs would find their place in the Ring of Life. Also, a more traditional way of representing genome evolution, allowing horizontal links for laterally transferred genes, showing the minority reports of conflicting signal as well as vertical branches, would probably permit a more accurate representation of the non-tree-of-life.


