I confess that I put off reviewing this because I feared that I would not understand it, or else would find it unoriginal: how could there be anything new to say about the similarities between historical linguistics and molecular phylogenetics? But I was wrong: I understand much of the paper and do think it says some important new things.

Basically what the authors propose is that we get even more serious about looking at the cross-applicability of methods and concepts being developed in linguistics and phylogenetics, particularly as these latter focus on evolutionary processes – rather than on the entities that evolve (words and proteins) – and also pay attention to the constraints that give direction to such processes such as syntax and molecular coevolution. Equally useful will be identification of processes that do not appear to be analogous between the domains. The authors suggest sound change, semantic change and purification as purely linguistic processes (the latter involving intent), and asexual/sexual reproduction and natural selection as purely biological.

It would be fun to argue about selection. The authors admit that there might be “cultural selection” (based on “egocentric”? or “content”? bias – see authors’ citation 70 [80]) that affect acceptance of certain elements within a language. Might it not also be that certain languages as systems are more likely to persist than others, either because of their ease of transmission (surely some languages are easier to learn than others) or affect on their speakers (surely language structure affects cultural “evolvability” somehow and unwritten languages have obvious limitations)? It may also be that in conceptualizing linguistic natural selection we should accept that evolution by natural selection can result from differential persistence as well as differential reproduction. Frédéric Bouchard (with whom the senior author has worked) has extensively developed this concept for biological evolution.

Authors make a number of observations which seem (to me, in my linguistic ignorance) novel, and well worthy of pursuit. For instance, applying models of incomplete lineage sorting (of alleles) to data in rapidly diverging languages seems a good idea, as does analogizing “the process of word formation in linguistics and protein assembly in biology”. It would be good to hear more about this and about using networks to identify composite words, as the senior author has already done for proteins (see their reference 94). It is also amusing that the numbers here are so close. Authors claim that there are about 200 universally conserved “basic parts of the lexicon”, and that second language learners need only master 4,000 – 5,000 words. There are maybe 200 universally conserved genes among all genomes, and the average prokaryotic genome has about 5,000 genes!.

Authors show a curious reticence to go all the way in analogizing language and genome evolution. They consider languages to be special since they are ‘products of the human mind’ and note that “If there was no speaker of the English language, a book containing Shakepeare’s Hamlet would just be a collection of paper with ink blots”. Actually, probably not. Surely clever Mandarin- (or even Martian-) speaking cryptographers could make some sense of the blots. And anyway, it’s analogously true that the sequence of bases in the human genome would only be just a sequence of bases without all the evolved machinery of gene expression and environmentally-affected epigenetic baggage, as opponents of genetic reductionism correctly but so tediously insist.