The article is quite philosophical at this point; yet, it raises a few important points that the community should notice.

Sorokina & Mushegian provide a thoughtful compilation of references that report observations that do not really fit into current models of protein folding. They try to come up with a framework of alternative hypotheses that might become the beginning of a new theory of protein folding.
At this stage, there are many points that might draw criticisms. I will detail only a few:

1.The computational folding models operating with physically meaningful interaction potentials between atoms and atomic groups suffer from considerable inaccuracies that might easily be above the distance between folded and unfolded states depending on the energy components included. This matter is not considered in the manuscript at all. So, the lowest free energy approach has never been properly implemented and the calculations have always delivered more or less false models due to this obstacle alone. Of course, if we talk about folding towards conformations with elevated energies, this computing of ensembles near the lowest free energy makes even less sense.
2)Many, sometimes repeating phrases in text hide that we do not know much about the actual in vivo participants of folding. The alternative model is expressed in schemes and general formulations, there is little mechanistic substance that can serve as the beginning of a model calculation or of an idea for an experiment. Therefore, the practical implications will remain very limited
3)For example, the authors repeatedly talk about the “welcoming chaperones” without providing much information what this might physically mean. As it appears to the reviewer, the notion of a “chaperone” is quite weak anyhow, without too much mechanistic explanation, although there is a huge literature about it. It would be good if specific chaperone systems had been reviewed in more molecular detail and how the available insight supports the rather generally formulated views on folding in this work.

