The homology concept is traditionally applied to protein sequence segments having no bias towards few amino acid types or short, simple, repetitive patterns and representing complete globular domains. The requirement of matching hydrophobic patterns and the larger number of alignment positions ensured significance of annotation transfer within such segment families. In this context, the existence of a common ancestor can be reliably postulated even for some cases of sequence pairs that have extremely diverged to essentially zero sequence identity.
These insurances are no longer valid if shorter sequence motifs or repetitive patterns such as in coiled coils are the subject for sequence similarity searches. Both concerns are valid in this study. I find it interesting what kind of additional arguments have been brought up by the authors to support the significance of the relatedness of sequence segments within the S-helix family (distinctness from other CCs, sequence architecture with signaling domains, biological context of well-studied examples). The comparison with major families of CCs is instructive, although this argument is not exhaustive as well as the architecture consideration. I agree with the authors that the sequence similarity within the family might indicate similarity of function. I am not so sure whether it also indicates evolutionary relatedness in all instances since it is not improbable that short functional motifs originate de novo from diverse ancestors (in this case, quite frequently occurring alpha-helical precursors).
I find this work of great interest and of importance for understanding protein evolution also beyond the specific functional module S-helix that is considered here.
It would be convenient for the reader if the authors could make available some additional information via an FTP site, in the text or on request. The exact starting sequence segments of the searches (beginning of Results section) would be helpful for people who wish to reproduce the data. The alignments and RPS-BLAST libraries of signaling domains listed in the Methods section would be of interest to other researchers.