This interesting manuscript uses the connectionist paradigm from artificial intelligence to provide a new theoretical framework describing how ecosystems can maintain “memory”, or nonlinear interactions between current inputs and past states. It addresses an important need in the field for a better theoretical understanding of how complex microbial communities are assembled and behave in the face of a changing environment, including ever-changing hosts.
The model is based on a generalization of the classic Lotka-Volterra model, updated to include the possibility of allelic evolution. Although this model is sufficiently general to support many kinds of dynamic behaviour, the simulations are restricted to the specific case where interactions are symmetric. Although this makes the simulations easier to interpret, it is unlikely to be a good model for real microbial communities where many interactions are known to be asymmetric (e.g. production of an antimicrobial by species A where species B does not have a retaliation strategy against that particular species, or differential responses to depletion of the same nutrient). However, it could reasonably be argued that relaxing this constraint should be a topic of future work.
However, even in this simplified model, the simulation results are interesting, for example providing instances of canalization into alternative states. Additionally, the demonstration of “ecological memory”, where the response to a current perturbation depends on past states of the community, is convincing. It would be useful to see a more detailed exploration of how much evolution is required for this (i.e. can you still get the same results from ecological changes even without evolution, and, for example, would heritable gene expression changes e.g. through epigenetic modification have the same effect?). Again, these points could be discussed briefly rather than necessarily adding a lot of new experiments to the present manuscript. It would also be useful to connect this work to the literature on microbial co-occurrence and what the implications are for our ability to detect meaningful ecological interactions using currently used techniques, and perhaps to point the way to what kinds of technical developments would be needed in future to do this right.
Overall, this is an interesting theoretical development and provides an exciting new way to look at ecosystem assembly and evolution.

