In this paper, the authors address the question of the relative order in which enzymes with high specificity evolved relative to the evolution of chromosomes, fitting these two events into their "major transitions in evolution" framework. They accomplish this by modeling enzyme evolution according to a block-and-cavity model previously and successfully used for other studies, implemented in two versions: one with ribozymes unlinked, and one with ribozymes linked into chromosomes. Essentially, the model proto-cells either divide once a threshold concentration of the chromosome is reached, or once enough independently replicating RNA enzymes reach sufficiently high concentration (but the daughter cells might not have all the ribozymes). The ribozymes are initially fully general but specialize during the simulation. In the case without chromosomes, the ribozymes remain unspecialized, whereas in the case with chromosomes the ribozymes rapidly specialize to carry out specific reactions. The interpretation is that chromosomes allow specialization because each ribozyme can then guarantee co-occurrence with other, specialized ribozymes.
This work is interesting in that such a clear result, that linkage of functions drives specialization, arises from such a simple, abstract model. I do have some concerns about the generality of the conclusions reached. For example, some other assortment mechanism than chromosomes that would also result in physical partition, for example hybridization of complementary regions or ability to bind a common substrate (e.g. through accessory aptamer domains, or through "zip code"-style packaging signals and apparatus) would be formally equivalent in the model, yet would imply a very different pathway of evolution with respect to chromosomes specifically. Additionally, it might be interesting to explore the implications of linkage for parasitism of the system by non-functional RNAs.
The work of Briones et al. doi: 10.1261/rna.1488609 on the evolution of modular RNAs versus single large RNAs is also relevant and should perhaps be discussed.
The equations were missing symbols (notably sigma signs) in the version I reviewed, and this needs to be corrected before publication, along with the language errors noted below.
Overall, I believe this is a valuable contribution to the literature that, with appropriate cautionary notes about the limits of what the model can define, will be of interest to those studying the origins of modern life.