In this manuscript, the authors propose that riboswitches might exist that bind cytokinins. The evidence in support of this contention is as follows. First, aptamers have been selected against a range of biological targets, including many molecules that are analogs of nucleotides or contain nucleotide bases as components. Second, riboswitches, which include an aptamer domain, are important agents for regulation in all three domains of life, although more examples have been found to date in the bacteria than in the other two domains. Third, cytokinins are adenine analogs, and are therefore plausible targets for RNA (or, indeed, DNA) aptamers to bind. Finally, expression analyses and binding site searches for known aptamers to an N6-substituted adenine shows that there are some transcripts that are regulated by cytokinins and also contain oligonucleotides matching the cores of these binding sites (although more extensive bioinformatics searches for an expression platform or, generally, alternate stable states, e.g. using the Vienna package or related tools, were not performed). The authors therefore propose that there are binding sites for cytokinins in Arabadopsis that are essentially the same as those identified by SELEX for related compounds. The main novelty claimed is that the hypothesis proposes that riboswtiches could be identified that bind small-molecules that are used as hormones, rather than closely related small-molecules that are used as metabolities, which could perhaps be seen as a somewhat arbitrary distinction.
Overall, the hypothesis is plausible, although I am not convinced that the hypothesis itself is sufficiently noteworthy to warrant publication as there are numerous classes of molecules that might plausibly be regulated by riboswitches but have not yet been shown to be so regulated in particular species or lineages. Additionally, substantially more statistical testing would be needed in order to rule out the possibility of chance matches in the binding site, and to show a specific association between transcripts containing the binding site and transcripts that are upregulated. I would strongly encourage the authors to experimentally test whether the transcripts they identify as containing the core motif actually bind adenine analogs (especially because the cost of synthesizing the relevant oligos with a T7 promoter is now so low) rather than publishing this as a hypothesis piece.