The origin of the genetic code remains a mystery, despite its centrality to biology. In this manuscript, Rodin et al. reconstruct the ancestral sequence of various tRNA molecules, revealing a palindromic structure in the reconstructed ancestral sequences. They use this model to propose a pathway for the addition of amino acids to the genetic code, linking the model to Szathmary's Coding Coenzyme Hypothesis (the idea that the primordial function of the (anti)codon-amino acid linkage was to deliver amino acids as coenzymes for ribozymes, and that this system was later co-opted for translation).
One problem that should be corrected is the 1980s view of the aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. We now know that there are more than 20 amino acids incorporated cotranslationally, that there are both class I and class II LysRS activities, many organisms are missing some of the synthetases, etc. If the authors want to argue that the classical picture is ancestral, some data to this effect is really needed. I think it is essential either to recognize the diversity and complexity of the aminoacyl-tRNA synthesis process (as seen in e.g. recent work from the Soll and Ibba labs) or to explicitly make the case that the idealized picture used in this paper really was the ancestral state relevant to the origin of the code. Along these lines, I was also surprised not to see reference to work on the Suga lab on the evolution of tRNA-aminoacylating ribozymes.
Not enough detail is given for the methods. For example, how was consistency between tree topologies measured, and what threshold was used to determine acceptability? Were the results robust to changes in the reconstruction method and, critically, the substitution model? (One key weakness of most available techniques is that they assume a constant nucleotide substitution process, which we know is not accurate for the diversity of modern genomes due to the heterogeneity of GC contents – software such as Galtier's phylo_win gets around this but may not scale to datasets this large). In cases where multiple tRNAs with the same specificity exist, what decisions were made about which paralogs to align?
What criteria were used in the manual assignment of ancestral states, and how did this manual assignment compare to model-based approaches such as likelihood and Bayesian approaches? (These are much slower, and might not be feasible for the full dataset, but could certainly be used to validate the manual methodology on a subset.) The claims made in the paper about the conservation of very deep palindromic structure are surprising, and the reader needs to be reassured that the results are robust to the many choices that can be made in this type of phylogenetic analysis.
I am concerned about the use of the binomial distribution to assess statistical significance of the DC as it makes the assumption that each pair of tRNAs is independent, yet the same tRNA sequence contributes to many pairs. It would be useful to check whether this violation of assumptions matters by a Monte Carlo approach to derive a null distribution empirically (in our experience, this type of model violation can result in orders of magnitude difference in apparent statistical significance in other problems: it might not be important in this situation, but then again, it might be). I would also argue that stratifying by domains could be useful as you could then treat each domain as an independent test of the hypothesis and use Fisher's method to combine the probabilities (assuming that there has been no horizontal transfer of tRNAs and that the tRNAs in each domain for a given specificity are monophyletic – on the other hand, you could certainly make the case that these assumptions are not necessarily warranted).
The pathway for code expansion proposed is consistent with the data presented, but I am unsure that it is uniquely consistent. In general, there are so many pathways for code expansion that have been proposed, all of which are plausible within their own framework but all of which disagree with one another to a greater or lesser extent except for a few basic assumptions that may stem from intuition and hence publication bias (e.g. the small amino acids came earlier) that it is difficult to find this particular pathway more convincing than the others. Some sort of empirical test that would discriminate amongst the various possibilities is really needed, but beyond the scope of this paper.
It's not clear to me why catalytic propensity would leap out as the explanation for separating the lists of amino acids (His, Asp, Glu, Lys, Arg) and (Val, Ile, Leu, Phe, Ala) rather than, say, hydrophobicity (which is known to play a huge role in protein structure and is the one property that invariably comes up as important in studies of code optimization.
In general, I think the discussion could benefit from a rewrite: the explanations given are typically plausible and consistent with the story, but also consistent with many other interpretations.
Overall, my opinion is that this manuscript provides an interesting speculation on the origin and evolution of the genetic code rather than the last word. However, the ideas it presents are certainly worth discussion and thus worth publishing, especially once the issues noted above are addressed.