In this intriguing manuscript, Wolf & Koonin combine comparative genomics with Eigen's (1978) concept of the error threshold to provide a new, comprehensive model for the origins of translation. Specifically, they build on Szathmary's (1993) model of amino acids as coenzymes in an RNA metabolism as a starting point for the genetic code. As pointed out by Knight & Landweber (2000), there are three pathways to a protein-based genetic code from the RNA world that preserves continuity of features of the genetic code: the RNAs that bind directly could have played the roles of tRNAs, mRNAs, or aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. Wolf & Koonin favor a model along the lines of the latter role, suggesting that cofactor-enhanced catalysis, and then nonribosomal synthesis of short peptides, were the original driving force for RNA-catalyzed translation. They present an intriguing new overall model of the evolution of the translation system, and highlight aspects of this model that could be tested in the laboratory. The main weakness of the manuscript in its current form is its endorsement of the frozen accident model (FAM) of the genetic code's evolution without the presentation of alternative explanations of the evidence in favor of the optimality of the genetic code relative to random codes, and the coding triplet/binding site associations that have been observed through SELEX and in the Group I intron. However, as the authors themselves point out, the resurrection of the frozen accident model is not an important feature of their overall model for the emergence of translation, and this discussion could be omitted without diminishing the manuscript's contribution.
The manuscript presents some interesting ideas that I have not seen elsewhere and that appear to shed substantial new light on the difficult problem of the origin of translation.
For example, the discussion on p. 13 that shows that the domains in the aaRS are highly derived relative to domains in other proteins is extremely interesting, because we might have expected the aaRS to be among the earliest proteins. If they are not, the likelihood that they displaced some other system for coded translation increases dramatically (Theobald & Wuttke's 2005 study of OB-fold superfamily relationships also supports this idea). One point that should be specifically noted in this context is that not only do these relationships imply that the aaRS are relatively late arrivals, but also that coded translation must have predated the aaRS so that the sequence information that allows us to determine the phylogenetic relationships among these folds could be transmitted to the present. In other words, if comparable folds were once produced by a different synthesis mechanism, either we would need either a system of reverse translation to copy the sequence information into nucleic acids, or all of the proteins produced by that mechanism would have been lost when coded translation took over.
Similarly, the discussion on pp. 33–39 of a plausible scenario for the evolution of the modern translation system seems plausible and is more detailed than most such scenarios to be found in the literature.
A couple of areas of the manuscript could potentially be supported by drawing on additional literature. For example, on p. 8, Dennett has an excellent discussion in "Darwin's Dangerous Idea" (Simon & Schuster, 1995) of the production of apparently irreducibly complex phenomena through simplification of an even more complex system, e.g. building an arch by taking away stones from a pile of rubble. The complexity of the system of peptide- specific synthetases that would be required for the model proposed here might make this an appropriate metaphor. Similarly, Yarus's (2001) article "On translation by RNAs alone", and Yarus & Welch's (2000) article "Peptidyl transferase: ancient and exiguous" contain some thoughts that would be relevant here and later in the manuscript.
The discussion of ribozymes on p. 18 could possibly benefit from a discussion of riboswitches and their implications for control mechanisms in the cell, and/or for the other roles or RNA that suggest the RNA World (use in cofactors, role in nucleotide metabolism, use of RNA as a primer in DNA synthesis, etc.) However, the manuscript is fairly long as it is, and most of these points have been raised many times in the cited literature already.
Finally, some of the specific contentions could benefit from more elaboration. For example, on pp. 11–12, we find the statement:
"Put another way, the conservation of the core of the translation machinery is the strongest available evidence that some form of LUCA actually existed (it is, in principle, conceivable that life started off as a multitude of distinct forms but a single variant of the translation system subsequently took over as a result of a sweeping horizontal gene transfer; however, this is a decidedly non- parsimonious scenario)."
Given that the present manuscript already proposes the evolution of an entire suite of RNA-based aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases that no longer exist, and given that some authors such as Carl Woese propose that the division of life into distinct phylogenetic lineages was a relatively late event (e.g. Woese 2002), it is unclear why horizontal gene transfer should be dismissed in this context.
Similarly, on p. 20, the authors seem to be strongly in favor of the hydrothermal vent scenario for the origin of life. A few words of caution to the effect that this is one of many hypotheses for life's origin, and that data are still far from conclusive, might be in order.
The discussion of the current evidence relating to the hypothesis that the genetic code arose through direct interactions between RNA and amino acids on p. 23 is good, but on p. 41 we read that "these affinities are weak, only manifest as a statistical trend, and worst of all, are seen, mostly, for chemically complex amino acids like arginine or histidine, rather than simple ones, such as glycine or alanine, that would be readily produced abiogenically." This statement requires some elaboration. Many of the potentially prebiotic amino acids, such as glycine, are difficult to evaluate with the affinity chromatography paradigm for technical reasons. It is possible that other methodologies, such as the allosteric selections pioneered by Tang & Breaker (1997), will allow us to see interactions in these cases, but for now absence of evidence should not be taken as evidence of absence. It is also far from certain that the biosynthesis of complex amino acids such as arginine would have been beyond the capabilities of RNA World organisms, so the primordial genetic code need not have been confined to simple amino acids. Second, the physical interactions involved are often far from weak: some amino acid aptamers, such as the best of Famulok's (1996) arginine aptamers, have sub-micromolar dissociation constants. It is true that the inconsistency between codon and anticodon modes of recognition remains to be resolved, but I do not agree with the assertion that "objectively, we should accept FAM as the most likely model for the emergence and evolution of translation". To accept FAM given what we know now about the optimality of the genetic code relative to random genetic codes, and the relationships between amino acid binding sites and cognate triplets, requires an alternative explanation for the strong statistical evidence that supports these hypotheses. In the absence of such an alternative explanation for why we see these patterns, which would be extremely unlikely under the FAM, I would recommend that the discussion be confined to pointing out where these processes would most likely be able to act in the model (for example, everyone agrees that direct interactions between coding triplets and amino acids are not relevant to the modern genetic code). It is possible that FAM is not an optimal description of what is actually meant in the discussion in the text – really, the claim seems to be that there is no necessary relationship between triplets of RNA and amino acids, rather than that there is in fact no pattern. However, in my opinion, the discussion of FAM vs. ARM vs. CRM as presented is likely to be a distraction from the overall value of the new ideas presented in the manuscript.
Finally, the description of experimental tests on p44 could benefit from more detail. Which properties of the postulated T RNAs are in doubt, and which steps would, if experimentally confirmed, best support the model? More specific guidance might increase the probability that supporting laboratory work would be carried out.