In this manuscript Bogaerts and colleagues, examine the proteomic effect of a bacterial pathogen upon the nematode C. elegans. For each of four time points following infection with the gram-positive pathogen Staphylococcus aureus, the authors sample the proteome using differential 2D gene electrophoresis and match spots with proteins using mass spectrometry. They identify 108 proteins which were differentially expressed in the infected strain and attempt to gain insight into the molecular nature of the response. The most represented group of differentiated proteins comprises enzymes involved in energy production and conversion indicating the high energy cost of fighting off an infection. Many of the differentially expressed proteins are known to participate in immune responses supporting the efficacy of this method.

Analysis of the proteomic response was mainly at the level of examining annotations. However, it would have also been interesting to examine the interaction between the different proteins found in the assay. The protein-protein interaction network of the proteins found to be differentially regulated in the response to infection might expose some interesting aspects of the immune response and its energy cost. Further it could be of importance to test the hypothesis that protein variants themselves may exhibit a differential response to infection. For example, the protein R11A5.4 of which two variants show up-regulation while two other variants show down-regulation with time of infection. Another example for differential regulation is seen in the case of ACGH-1. Elaboration of the differential response of protein variants may provide insights into their role in the fight against an infection.

The authors mention a separate experiment and analysis for the C. elegans response to the gram-negative pathogen Aeromonas hydrophila. It would be interesting to compare between these two responses. Such an evaluation could reveal the general mechanisms of an immune response invoked by any infectious host and the more specific components of responses towards particular pathogens.

Further analysis could be directed towards testing specific hypotheses by mutant analysis. As mentioned by the authors it would be of interest to compare the response of a wildtype to a mutant immune-challenged C. elegans strain. The list of potentially important immune proteins could be used to find mutant strains and compare their proteomic response to infection to the one of the wildtype strain.

One minor concern involves the discussion of alcohol dehydrogenase's possible involvement in the infection response. We find the suggestion of an anaerobic shift in metabolism of infected worms as a rather unlikely explanation for the strong up-regulation of this protein during infection. The second mentioned option of the role of alcohol dehydrogenase in lipid metabolism and glyceroneogenesis is much more reasonable and fits well with the concept of the infectious energy cost.

Overall, this paper contributes to the effort of indentifying the molecular signature of the response to infection and constitutes a firm basis for future in-depth investigation of this important field.