In this manuscript Piriyapongsa et al. report a systematic analysis of the potential for transposable elements (TE) to contribute to proteomes. This is an issue of recent controversy in the literature with estimates of proteins with TE's in an organism ranging from 0.1% to 4%. The authors point out that along with the variation of estimates, is also variation of the datasets used and the searches invoked to analyze them. Datasets used comprise either predicted or experimentally-characterized protein sequences. Search methods used are DNA sequence similarity methods such as RepeatMasker, protein based searches, or profile based searches. The latter two methods are expected to be more sensitive than DNA searches. One specific goal of this study is to test whether the number of detected TEs is low in the clean set of experimentally-characterized protein sequences despite the use of sensitive sequence similarity measures. Another is to analyze the translation potential by two additional codon-based methods.

The authors find that even the more sensitive protein and profile methods do not uncover too many more instances of translated TE instances. This provides strong evidence that the original result – TEs exapted in 4% of the human proteome – is roughly off by an order of magnitude, when examined with respect to validated protein sequences as opposed to predictions of protein sequences. However, the most dramatic evidence for the general non-translation of TE's comes from Piriyapongsa et al.'s codon-based analysis which shows that they are as untranslated as ALUs. This dramatic lack of coding potential as estimated by the GeneMark program does however beg the question of why these have apparently maintained an open reading frame and did not accumulate non-sense mutations by drift.

One remaining open question now that the extent of TE exaptation is roughly estimated is the exact delineation of the TE proteins. One attractive method is the phylogenetic approach which Piriyapongsa et al. demonstrate for the THAP domain. Perhaps this approach can be applied globally to achieve a final tally of TE's contribution to proteomes. The authors also hint at a second method: the integration of the 7 sequence comparison methods to increase confidence in TE exaptation predictions. The authors show a checkered pattern of success and failure of the 7 methods to detect previously identified TE-associated proteins. From one aspect it is interesting to ask if the specific failures of some of the programs can be overcome by tuning the specific search parameter. And from another aspect, could this positive control set and the pattern of successes across the different methods be used to learn how the different methods complement each other? This seems to be especially in demand given the very limited amount of overlap between many of the methods. Such integration may lead to a more accurate list of TE exaptations.

Finally, the notion that many genes contain TE's that are not translated leads to the interesting question of how the organism protects itself against disruption by TE insertions. Surprisingly TE's may not promote creativity at the protein level but instead creativity at the level of new mechanisms to curb the disruption caused by proliferating selfish elements.