In this paper, Simons uses public SAGE data to quantify changes in gene expression of the set of 14 genes that compose the proteasome. First, the overall relative frequencies of these genes are calculated. A SAGE library is then described as disorderly if the standard deviation of the genes' observed to overall differences is high. It is noteworthy, that the frequencies of the most disorderly libraries are remarkably similar to those of the most orderly libraries, suggesting there is no characteristic state of disorder but instead that each mess is unique.

Simons then shows that the overall tumor libraries are significantly more disorderly – as evidenced by Wilcoxon's test – as a group than the normal libraries. Since this is an important point, I believe it would be helpful to visualize this difference with a principal components type analysis. The 14 dimensions (genes) can be reduced to 2 or 3 and plotted for both the normal and tumor samples. This method is further called for since the author shows in Figure ​Figure22 that the genes expression are correlated.

An issue is next raised about whether disorderly profiles represent "momentary fluctuations in transcription rates" or heritable states. The author shows that deviations of the proteasome genes' expression in a tumor correlates with those in non-tumor from the same patient. Based upon this evidence, the author states that "a disorderly expression profile can be extremely stable and can be transmitted to a clonal derivative as a constitutive trait." However, since this result was observed in three of only four instances, it would be prudent not to draw too strong of a conclusion about the stability of gene disorder based upon this dataset alone. Furthermore, one could argue that difficulties associated with exclusively dissecting tumor vs. non-tumor samples from a given tissue, compromise our ability to meaningfully compare them; i.e. the two may be similar simply because of impure sample isolations.

The author presents an index for disorderliness: standard deviation of the log obs/exp values. I would advise against this formulation because it is not symmetric, biasing in favor of reduced expression. For example, an increase of expression by 10% would be log(1.1/1) = 0.0952, while a decrease by 10% results in log(0.9/1) = -0.1054. Since, the author makes the point that disorderliness tends to occur in terms of under-expression, the lack of symmetry in the index is a clear confounding effect. This can be easily fixed by taking the log of the absolute difference, and adding a negative sign if obs is less than exp. However, it may be the best to convert to Z-scores, to explicitly take into account the variation of each gene's expression.