A ratchet for protein complexity
Organisms and cells are bewilderingly complicated, and the molecular machines that perform many basic cellular functions are often giant, multi-subunit, multifunctional protein complexes with tangled evolutionary histories. It is generally assumed that such complexes arose by the stepwise accretion of individual proteins, each addition representing a selective advantage by adding to or refining the machine's performance. But on page 360 of this issue, Thornton and colleagues1 argue against this standard explanation in one particular instance — that of a ring-shaped protein complex in fungi. The authors show how evolutionary processes entailing loss of function rather than gain might initially drive a system towards complexity, independently of selection*.

Many cellular molecular machines contain several proteins that self-assemble into a multi-subunit ring. In simple cases, rings are homo-oligomeric; that is, all the subunits are identical and thus probably the products of a single gene. In more complex (hetero-oligomeric) examples, the protein molecules in the ring are different, but may be related. Often, hetero-oligomeric rings seem to have arisen from homo-oligomeric complexes after a gene encoding a single subunit became duplicated, producing two or more gene copies (called paralogues), with each copy subsequently evolving to encode a slightly different protein.

The question that Thornton and colleagues address is, why does this happen? Do the structurally distinguishable subunits and/or their specific pattern of assembly confer improved or additional functions on the protein complex, with selection for their enhanced performance being the evolutionary driving force? Alternatively, might neutral processes be responsible, at least initially?

To understand how the latter possibility might come about, imagine that a gene encoding, for example, eight subunits of a homo-oligomeric ring undergoes duplication (Fig. 1). The two paralogous gene copies that this duplication produces — and the protein subunits they encode (call them A and B) — will of necessity begin to diverge through accumulation of neutral mutations. These mutations might not at first affect any of the subunits' functions, so that functional octameric rings could continue to form by a random sampling of A and B subunits. But further mutations might result in each subunit losing the ability to bind others of its own type, A to A or B to B. However, as long as A still binds B and B still binds A, functional rings can form.

As A and B continue to co-evolve through the acquisition of further neutral mutations, the likelihood of reversing back along the mutational path to the initial single-gene homo-oligomeric complex becomes vanishingly small. We can thus see the homo-oligomer to hetero-oligomer transition as an inexorable evolutionary ratchet. And even if there were some slight selective disadvantage to using a hetero-oligomeric complex (for example, complex formation could become slower), this could be overcome in small populations — in which the efficiency of selection is reduced and mildly harmful mutations can be fixed by chance2.

Some chaperonins — molecular machines that assist other proteins to fold into functional configurations — have until recently provided the best evidence for such a scenario. Microorganisms known as archaea have one, two or three paralogous genes encoding chaperonin subunits that form rings: homo-oligomeric eight-membered rings when there is a single gene, or hetero-oligomeric eight- or nine-membered rings when there are two or three genes. Such paralogy seems to reoccur frequently in archaea, and a neutral co-evolutionary picture of the sort described above has been suggested3 to explain it.

Comparative bioinformatic studies4 support the idea that hetero-oligomeric archaeal chaperonins consisting of two different subunits are not functionally distinct from the homo-oligomers, and thus did arise neutrally. Adaptive changes can follow later, however. Indeed, there is direct evidence for specialized roles for the eight distinct chaperonin subunits of eukaryotes (organisms such as plants, animals and fungi)5.

So a more realistic picture might be as follows. Rarely, gene duplication is quickly followed by functional differentiation (as proposed in early formulations of the hypothesis of evolution by gene duplication6). Selection against loss of either duplicate would then be ensured early on. Perhaps more often, though, the paralogous condition might first be locked in by the above-described co-evolutionary ratchet, allowing functional differences (if any) to be acquired later (if ever). That is what Thornton and colleagues1 argue has happened in the case of a six-membered hetero-oligomeric ring that forms part of the enzymes known as vacuolar H+-ATPases (V-ATPases) in fungi. Their argument is especially compelling because it rests not only on bioinformatics, but also on experiments, including the synthesis and testing of proteins that the authors propose are ancestral to the V-ATPase subunits.

In most eukaryotes, the V-ATPase six-membered ring is made up of five copies of the protein Vma3 and one of its paralogue Vma16. In fungi such as budding yeast, by contrast, one of the five Vma3 proteins is replaced by Vma11, which is a fungus-specific paralogue of Vma3. The abilities of these subunits to bind to one another7 are such that Vma11 must lie between Vma16 and Vma3 in the ring, and Vma3 cannot form the interface with the side of Vma16 that Vma11 can. This represents a sort of functional degeneration, because the last common ancestor of Vma3 and Vma11 must have been able to interface with either side of Vma16, as Vma3 must still do in organisms other than fungi.

Thornton and colleagues1 synthesized proteins that matched the phylogenetically inferred ancestor of Vma3 and Vma11, as well as that of Vma16 and other intermediates in the predicted evolutionary pathway. They demonstrate that Anc.3–11, the inferred ancestor of fungal Vma3 and Vma11, does indeed interface with either side of Vma16. The authors tested the functionality of these and other inferred evolutionary ancestors and intermediates by expressing them in yeast mutants that lacked current versions of one or more of the three genes. According to this picture, when Anc.3–11 underwent duplication, one paralogue (which was to become modern fungal Vma3) lost the ability to interact with the 'anticlockwise' side of Vma16. The other paralogue (which became Vma11) lost the ability to interact with the 'clockwise' side of Vma16 and/or the anticlockwise side of Vma3.

A general theory, sometimes called constructive neutral evolution, to explain how neutral processes might drive a system towards complexity is more than a decade old8,9,10. But the study by Thornton and colleagues1 may provide the most compelling experimental evidence to date. Of course, one can never prove that some subtle, unidentified selective advantage was not involved in the evolution of the V-ATPase protein ring, but neutrality would seem the most justifiable default hypothesis. Thus, a neutral theory of molecular evolution, normally invoked for nucleotide substitutions, may also apply to certain higher-order structures such as multi-subunit protein rings. How general such neutral mutational drives to complexity might be is one of evolutionary theory's deeper unanswered questions.

