This manuscript critically examines current models for the origin of mitochondria during eukaryogenesis around twelve elements or questions that any eukaryogenetic hypothesis should try to account for: six present-day observables and six historical inferences. The authors find that no single hypothesis explains satisfactorily all the points and urge for new models that accommodate those observables and inferences well. This is a laudable objective that should stimulate the proposal of better-elaborated or refined models providing increasing levels of detail for all these points. The discussion is rich and insightful at some points, more naïve or simplistic and possible subjective at others. At any rate, this discussion is interesting and much welcome.

Given the variety of elements provided, a point-by-point treatment would be too long. I will only highlight a few points:

Perhaps my most important concern regarding this manuscript relates to the lack of a real ecological perspective, which is absolutely required for eukaryogenetic models (but most often ignored). The authors use the term “ecology” but in a very restrictive way; they refer to the biotic interactions between the mitochondrial ancestor and its host. However, the fate of any symbiotic relationship, and most particularly of metabolic symbioses, depends on the environment. The environmental context is absent from this debate, despite being crucial. The authors may not want to enter in this discussion, given that most models don’t, but then I suggest that they simply talk of ‘biotic interactions’, not ‘ecology’. Ecology implies biotic and abiotic interactions, the latter are not considered here.

The authors reason that because membrane remodelling and cytoskeletal functions are present in archaea, early phagocytosis is supported. However, the link is not that straightforward, since archaea apparently lack phagocytosis even if they can remodel, and in some instances even fuse, their membranes. Those elements are therefore necessary but not sufficient for phagocytosis.

Phylogenomic analyses to unravel old relationships are to be taken with caution. The authors give credit to analyses suggesting a rickettsial ancestry for mitochondria and, based partly on this, favour a parasitic origin of mitochondria. However, that affinity is far from solid given potential problems in phylogenetic reconstruction derived of compositional biases and long-branch attraction (rickettsiales and mitochondria being prone to it because fast-evolving). Increasing the alphaproteobacterial sampling in these analyses can possibly lead to some improvement.

Lokiarchaeota. The authors may want to refer to the Asgard archaea collectively, since there are other TACK-like archaeal lineages that seem to share more genes with eukaryotes (Zaremba-Niedzwiedzka et al., Nature 2017). Also, the fact that Lokiarchaeota might use hydrogen does not necessarily support the hydrogen hypothesis (page 7, line 10). The syntrophy hypothesis, for instance, is equally based in interspecies hydrogen transfer.

Page 7, lines 48–54. Here, the authors claim that metabolic complementarity is not enough to establish syntrophy. I agree in principle. However, this is where the ecological part is missing in this manuscript and where it would be important to consider these interactions in natural ecosystems. Some syntrophic models clearly specify metabolic interactions in plausible environmental contexts. Furthermore, the metabolic interactions proposed are based in actual syntrophies occurring in oxygen-depleted environments (for a detailed review see Lopez-Garcia et al., J Theor Biol, 2017). The assertion that “To this day, no case is known where a syntrophic relationship was turned to endosymbiosis” (again mentioned in page 9, lines 38–40) is not true. This has happened many times in protists. It is arguably rare in prokaryotes, but… eukaryotes evolved only once.

Page 8, lines 44–46. The authors favour parasitic scenarios of eukaryogenesis because, in their opinion, conservative vertical transmission of proto-symbionts in syntrophic scenarios is hard to explain. This claim is not substantiated. Syntrophic scenarios provide a flexible historical path in an ecologically meaningful context whereby, in the beginning, interactions are facultative. Under those conditions, neither vertical conservation nor eukaryogenesis occur. However, at a given point, syntrophy becomes obligatory (this is likely stabilized by transfer of essential genes from the symbiont to the host genome and lost from the donor) and at some point eukaryogenetic. Under this situation, natural selection imposes vertical transmission, as the survival of the consortium in their precise ecological context depends on the two partners.

In their supplementary discussion, the authors discard models proposing an endosymbiotic origin of the nucleus because in addition of requiring two steps (two endosymbioses), phylogenomic analyses do not support a third, major genome donor apart of the archaeal and proteobacterial sources. The endosymbiotic origin of the nucleus is not without problems, but these are not the good arguments against it. First, multiple metabolic symbioses are extremely frequent in the microbial world (see e.g. Lopez-Garcia et al., J Theor Biol 2017 and references therein) and parsimony does not necessarily work in evolution. Second, phylogenomic analyses do indeed reveal additional discernible bacterial heritage to that of Alphaproteobacteria in eukaryotic genomes, including deltaproteobacteria, planctomycetes or actinobacteria (Pittis & Gabaldon, Nature 2026).

The authors also dismiss the possibility of methanogenesis as energetic metabolism for the archaeon based on the required strict anaerobiosis and on the fact that methanogenesis-related genes are absent from eukaryotes and that archaea-related eukaryotic genes do not resemble those of classical methanogens. However, the authors need to separate the metabolism of the archaeal ancestor of eukaryotes and that of the evolving methanogenic consortium. It might well be that another kind of anaerobic metabolism involving e.g. fermentation occurred at the origin of eukaryotes, but the anaerobiosis transition to aerobiosis must have represented the same problem. Both the hydrogen and the syntrophy models imply a transition from the methanogenic consortium involving a facultative aerobic partner (future mitochondrion) to an aerobic consortium that abandons methanogenesis in favour of a much more efficient aerobic respiration. Both models predict the same: methanogenesis is lost. Consequently, it is not at all surprising that methanogenesis related genes are missing in eukaryotes. The contrary would be surprising. Finally, although archaeal-related genes in eukaryotes seem to resemble more TACKL-archaea genes that those of classical euryarchaeotal methanogens, it is now clear that at least Bathyarchaeota, on the TACKL side, do have methanogenesis genes. This implies that the ancestor of archaea was likely a methanogen and leaves open the possibility of a methanogenesis-based consortium at the onset of eukaryogenesis; methanogenesis being subsequently fully lost.

Table 2 . The “(untenable)” in the syntrophy hypothesis case is not justified in light of the above. The syntrophy hypothesis, as the rest of the models, can be criticized in many ways but from an ecological and evolutionary perspective, the kind of ab-initio metabolic consortium proposed makes sense. Methanogenesis itself is somehow irrelevant because this metabolism is subsequently lost. The same is true for any other kind of anaerobic metabolism, since the ancestor of eukaryotes was an aerobic heterotroph.

