This article presents an extensive molecular phylogenetic analysis of phenylalanine ammonia lyase (PAL, many of which also use tyrosine as substrate), the enzyme catalyzing the first step of the phenylpropanoid pathway leading, in plants and some fungi, to the synthesis of flavonoid secondary metabolites and lignin monomers. The study includes also the related enzyme histidine ammonia lyase (HAL), widespread in the three domains of life. Since land plants and dikaryotic fungi PAL form two sister monophyletic clades clearly distinct from eukaryotic HAL and from their prokaryotic homologues, it is proposed that PAL was transferred horizontally from bacteria to land plants or to fungi and, subsequently, from land plants to fungi or viceversa. This is an interesting observation, well supported by the phylogenetic analysis presented, that leads the authors to hypothesize a key role of this enzyme for the adaptation of plants to land.

I have two major comments. First, the hypothesis that a horizontal gene transfer of PAL to the land plant ancestor is at the origin of the phenylpropanoid metabolism and of their adaptation to terrestrial ecosystems is appealing. However, a single enzyme does not make a pathway and, in the absence of data about the remaining genes involved in phenylpropanoid metabolism, this idea remains hypothetical. In this sense, the title of the article appears too conclusive (A horizontal gene transfer at the origin of phenylpropanoid metabolism: a key adaptation of plants to land). Have the authors tried to make preliminary phylogenetic analyses for other genes in the pathway or, at least, do they have an idea about their phylogenetic distribution? It would be interesting to compare the distribution of enzymes involved in flavonoid and lignin monomer biosynthesis with that of PAL.

My second comment relates to the primary selective advantage attributed to the acquisition of PAL from bacteria, which might have been the production of antimicrobial or pigmented metabolites that would allow the successful competition of land plants/fungi in soils or protection against UV light. Again, the idea is attractive but, to prove it, would require as a preliminary step to show that the whole flavonoid biosynthesis pathway emerged prior to that of lignin monomer biosynthesis.

If the latter appeared first, one could propose instead that the advantage of acquiring this pathway was to increase stiffness and developing the ability to construct rigid structures, an essential property of land plants and some stages of many fungal life cycles. Perhaps the authors can consider this possibility or discuss why they think it is unlikely. In addition, green algae, which also colonize soil surfaces, have also to compete with other members of the microbial community and to protect themselves from UV. They might have preferred to keep their own, non PAL-derived, protective systems against microbes and UV light.

Alternatively, the authors might wish to consider the possibility that flavonoid synthesis did not confer a particular efficient protection against microorganisms, but against metazoan grazers, which constitute indeed the major threat for land plants.

