In this paper, G. Jékely proposes a hypothesis to explain the origin of phagotrophy, an essential property common to extant eukaryotic lines, in protoeukaryotic ancestors. The development of phagotrophy took place after the loss of the protoeukaryotic cell wall and led to important changes in cell architecture. The engulfment of one alphaproteobacterium that avoided digestion originated mitochondria and triggered eukaryogenesis. Phagotrophy originated in a social context, such as a microbial mat or biofilm where protoeukaryotes would behave as cheaters benefiting from the cooperative nature of the community without contributing to it, and was the consequence of two selective processes. The first involved the loss of the cell wall to escape antibiotics or other anti-cheater mechanisms targeting it. Once the cell wall was lost, phagocytosis would have evolved to maximize energy yield by incorporating preys and using them as an internal resource.

The proposal presented here is interesting. In fact, the idea that eukaryotes evolved in microbial mats, biofilms or other types of sedimentary social communities is implicit in some previous models (at least several symbiotic models).

However, despite its interest, Jékely's idea is very difficult to test (see below) and does not provide information allowing discrimination between existing models for the origin of eukaryotes or an explanation for the origin of the eukaryotic nucleus, their key-defining character.

A few specific comments follow.

1) I think there is a misuse of the term 'predation' as predation implies the ingestion (phagocytosis) of a prey. To me, 'digestion of neighboring cells', 'extracellular digestion and diffuse nutrient uptake' (referred to as predation in the manuscript) correspond to osmotrophy and, as such, are common to both prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms. On the contrary, predation (implying phagotrophy) is a property exclusive of eukaryotes. The so-called 'predatory bacteria' such as Bdellovibrio spp. are not strictly predatory, but osmotrophic. They digest externally a larger prey into which they penetrate.

2) Social cheaters are proposed to lose their cell walls as a way to escape to cheater-control strategies (e.g. antibiotics) developed by cooperative community members (referred as the host by Jékely, although this term may be also misleading). Wall-less cells would be buffered against osmotic crisis by the protecting biofilm environment. However, in nature many (if not most) microorganisms live in biofilms, mats or similar where social conflict occurs. If biofilms or mats host antibiotic producers that make antibiotics to fight against competitors or cheaters, antibiotics would have an increased concentration in the biofilm due to limited diffusion and microorganisms should cope with that. According to Jékely, cell-wall loss would be one advantageous adaptation. However, despite the fact that most microorganisms do form biofilms in nature, they do not lose their cell-walls. Why (frequent) cell-wall loss is not observed in natural biofilms or mats?

3) Jékely says that phagotrophy evolved as the most efficient system of predatory exploitation, and that this had to do with the yield of ATP production, which would be maximized if an internal resource were used. There would be 'a difference in the usefulness of respiration between osmotrophs and phagotrophs'. First, the latter is difficult to understand looking to nature, as O2-respiring bacterial osmotrophs are ecologically extremely successful. Second, I found the whole paragraph somewhat unclear, not knowing exactly if what was advantageous for the protoeukaryote was the phagocytosis of external food and its digestion as internal resource, the specific phagocytosis of mitochondrial ancestors and the acquisition of O2-respiration, or both. One possible reading is that Jékely suggests that this need to maximize ATP yield would have promoted the phagocytosis of mitochondrial O2-respiring ancestors within O2-respiring and/or fermentative protoeukaryotes (referred to as heterotrophs in the text). I can understand the advantage of acquiring O2-respiring mitochondria by a fermentative host and any other type of host using a less energy-yielding pathway (e.g. other types of respiration, methanogenesis would be one if O2 was not inhibitory for this pathway). However, I have more difficulties to understand why an O2-respiring single-celled organism (even if in community) needs to incorporate O2-respiring mitochondria. Organisms adapted to O2-respiration would respire rather than ferment given an appropriate O2 partial pressure exists. If O2 concentration is limiting for an O2-respiring host cell, it would be also limiting for an engulfed respiring alphaproteobacterium. The most likely explanation would be that mitochondria conferred O2-respiration to an organism that lacked it. This part of the hypothesis needs some clarification; perhaps, it would be worthwhile trying to describe better the nature of the protoeukaryotic ancestor, at least in metabolic terms.

4) Jékely also suggests several ways of testing part of this hypothesis. One consists to see whether an evolutionary arms race between cheaters and cooperative community members leads to changing strategies and molecular mechanisms of cheating. Another proposes to see whether cell wall-less mutants survive better in biofilms or in suspension. However, proving both (which, by the way, would appear likely) does not prove Jékely's hypothesis or even strongly favor it. It is difficult to test this model, though this does not invalidate it.

A third point mentioned by Jékely is to study social conflict in marine microbial biofilms 'since nutrient-rich terrestrial soils are not likely to have existed at the origin of eukaryotes'. I think this is rather gratuitous. We ignore exactly the environmental conditions at the time eukaryotes originated, and even when they appeared. They might or might not have evolved in marine environments. However, if we admit that eukaryotes appeared after prokaryotes, the latter had most likely colonized also continental substrates by the time eukaryotes evolved. Nutrient-rich environments for microorganisms have sense only at the microscale. I can very easily imagine many continental niches where biofilms and nutrient-rich substrates existed (including freshwater systems also), at least as nutrient-rich as the marine environment.

