This is a very unusual article due to its length and to the density of its content. Therefore, I will not make an in-depth revision of all the characters and transitions discussed in it, or decorticate all the hypotheses produced, for such an analysis would likely exceed the length of the present article (and perhaps the patience of the reader). I will rather concentrate in a few points that are claimed to be particularly essential for the main objective of this paper as announced in its title, rooting the tree of life, which do not appear to me sufficiently unambiguous as to safely conclude where the root lies.

Strengths (and a word of caution)
The theoretical base enounced at the beginning of the manuscript to tackle the directionality of evolutionary change and suggest a position for the root of the tree of life appears most reasonable. It proposes a combination, or rather an interpretation, of gene phylogenies with cladistics, transition analysis, congruence testing and critical palaeontology. If rigorously applied, this strategy should provide the best approximation that scientists can dream of to the history of life. However, and unfortunately, there are various problems associated with all of these approaches, including the lack of robust data in various cases, as commented below. Therefore, much caution is needed to avoid biased conclusions and forcing the interpretation of the data (e.g. polarising transitions) to accommodate a pre-formed/assumed existing model. To avoid this, all possibilities should be tested using the same characters and looking for reasonable interpretations to see which one is most parsimonious. Even so, there is no proven rule that evolution follows necessarily the most parsimonious way man can think of, so that congruence among different markers/approaches under careful watchfulness is needed. Knowing that, one essential way to increase the number of meaningful data to place characters on phylogenetic trees is coming back to organismal biology, as is stated in the concluding remarks of the article. I fully agree that this is imperative.

In addition of the above theoretical principle, the present manuscript is a valuable source of evolutionary hypotheses. Most of them require rigorous testing before reaching any positive conclusion, which the author acknowledges in many cases. Some hypotheses may reveal right, others wrong. This does not diminish the merit of their formulation. They are open to scientific validation in the future. However, some of the evolutionary hypotheses that are formulated, which are crucial to the point made is this article, are taken for granted on grounds that are not robust enough, as I discuss below.

Weaknesses
My major concerns relate to the aspects that I comment as follows.

1) Methods
The author criticises (rightly) many problems associated with gene phylogenies and different artefacts affecting phylogenetic reconstruction that can lead to wrong evolutionary conclusions regarding organismal diversification. However, BLAST (BLASTp) is used here to determine not only the presence or absence of particular protein homologues in different bacteria but also to ascertain their phylogenetic affinity (e.g. high BLAST scores of Aquifex P-ring and L-ring proteins with epsilon- and delta-proteobacteria are used to "confirm" the putative position of Aquifex within the Proteobacteria; the eukaryotic enzyme UDP-N-acetylglucosamine is suggested to have been inherited from Gram positive bacteria because the domain of a glycosyl transferase that makes the capsular polysaccharide in endobacteria appears among the first BLAST hits, together with one archaeon, but not with alpha-proteobacteria). Nevertheless, we know that BLAST search is affected by even more important problems than tree phylogenies, especially if there are compositional biases due to different types of adaptations. Simple BLASTp does not absolutely ensure the detection of a distant homologue in a given organism. More importantly, BLAST cannot be properly be used to say if a given homologue has been vertically inherited or horizontally acquired. In order to do this, a careful phylogenetic analysis including a good taxonomic representation and appropriate reconstruction methods is required [see Koski and Golding, 2001, The closest BLAST hit is often not the nearest neighbor, J Mol Evol, 52, 540–542]. Even so, problems linked to the lack of phylogenetic signal may mask the results. In this sense, BLAST can be indicative but is not demonstrative. Therefore, unless proper phylogenetic analyses are carried out and the results are robust enough, the hypotheses based exclusively in BLAST analyses cannot be confirmed. Whereas these problems are recognised by the author in various places of the manuscript, there is a tendency to use BLAST results as proof in others (or as confirming proof, but if all congruent proofs are as solid as BLAST hits there may be a problem in the conclusion), so I would insist in a more careful formulation of BLAST-based hypotheses.

2) Paleontological evidence
In various parts of the manuscript the author makes affirmations such as "Palaeontology shows that eubacteria are much more ancient than eukaryotes" (abstract), "... palaeontological evidence that eubacteria are much older than eukaryotes..." (introduction: multiple transition analysis...), "morphological fossil evidence that eubacteria are roughly three times older than eukaryotes..." (introduction: the neomuran revolution), etc. According to him, (eu)bacteria would have existed already 2.8 Ga or perhaps 3–3.5 Ga ago, whereas eukaryotes and archaea (archaebacteria) would have evolved only ~800 Ma ago. However, the oldest microbial fossil record is full of uncertainties at present, and does not sustain the above. There are three types of traces to be considered: morphological, organic biomarkers (fossil lipids) and isotopic. Morphologically, except for perhaps cyanobacteria, (eu)bacteria and archaea (archaebacteria) would be indistinguishable in the fossil record. Furthermore, the morphological identification of the most ancient putative fossils at 3.5 Ga as cyanobacteria or as fossils at all is highly discussed [Brasier et al. 2002, ref. [158]]. In addition, inorganic structures resembling filamentous organisms can be made purely abiotically [Garcia-Ruiz et al. 2003, Science 302: 1194]. This leads to the conclusion that morphology alone cannot be seriously trusted. Cavalier-Smith alludes to the presence of hopanoids, diagnostic lipids for bacteria, in 2.8 Ga-old rocks. If fossil biomarkers are to be trusted, then it should be so also for fossil steranes diagnostic for eukaryotes and fossil polyisoprenoids diagnostic for archaea. Steranes showing alkylation patterns so far characteristic of eukaryotes have been detected in Archaean rocks (Fortescue group, 2.7 Ga) [Brocks et al. 1999, Science 285: 1033]. Although they are claimed to be probably syngenetic with the rock by Brocks and Summons, later contamination cannot be excluded. Nevertheless, steranes certainly syngenetic with the rock have been extracted from ~1.6 Ga-old material at the Barney Creek formation [Brocks and Summons 2005, in Biogeochemistry, Schlesinger WH ed., Elsevier, pp. 63–115]. This would be in agreement with morphological evidence suggesting ~1.5 Ga-old acritarchs as eukaryotes [Javaux et al. 2001, ref. [146]]. Although most biomarker data likely lie in the hands of oil companies, diagnostic markers for archaea, such as crocetane, have been detected in Proterozoic rocks [Brocks and Summons 2005, in Biogeochemistry, Schlesinger WH ed., Elsevier, pp. 63–115]. Unfortunately, some fossil markers, such as phytane, can be derived from bacteria (cyanobacteria), eukaryotes (plants) and archaea (archaeol) and are therefore not diagnostic. Finally, C isotopic evidence suggests that methanotrophy and methanogenesis were present 2.8 Ga ago [Hayes, 1983, ref. [149]]. The author mentions it, but he suggests that we need to look for alternative explanations. Why? Although the fossil record can be rigorously criticised, the combination of lipid, isotopic and morphological evidence tends to support, contrary to the author's claim, that archaea and eukaryotes are much older than 800 Ma. Palaeontology does not demonstrate that bacteria are older than any of the other groups. Clearly, more solid data are needed to resolve this issue, but hopefully, improvement in methods and critical analysis of the Archaean fossil record will provide a more clear answer in the near future. Cavalier-Smith's hypothesis that archaea and eukaryotes appeared more or less simultaneously and only ~800 Ma ago will then be confirmed or refuted on a palaeontological basis. In the meanwhile, I suggest that a much more moderate tone be used regarding the fossil record "proofs".

3) Cell membrane
The author emphasises in various places that "the most fundamental question concerning the root of the tree of life is whether the ancestral cell had two bounding membranes (i.e. was a negibacterium) or just one membrane as in archaebacteria and posibacteria" (introduction: multiple transition analyses of complex multimolecular characters can root the tree). According to the author, it is mechanistically difficult to conceive a transition from a single membrane (Gram positives) to two membranes (Gram negative bacteria) (results: membranome evolution). He thus concludes that the transition must have occurred from a two-membrane bounded cenancestor to a single-membrane bounded cell in Gram positive bacteria, and hence, in archaea and eukaryotes which, having a single membrane, would derive from a one-membrane Gram positive stem. We see here that the major argument (together with the proteasome that is discussed below) given to polarise the tree and put the root within the Gram negative bacteria instead of placing it between (eu)bacteria and archaea, as is more generally accepted, depends exclusively on the weight that is given to the two-versus-one membrane boundary compared to the different stereochemistry of the archaeal and (eu)bacterial membranes. Which character is more important, the number of membranes or a different membrane stereochemistry? As Cavalier-Smith acknowledges, although still concluding that this allows polarising the tree, the two-versus-one membrane criterion is not as solid as it appears to be since, for instance, the archaeon Ignicoccus has two membranes. Therefore, either Ignicoccus derives directly from a two-membrane bounded cenancestor and the rest of archaea lost the outer membrane, which would be compatible with the root of the tree being between (eu)bacteria and archaea, or an outer membrane evolved in a one-membrane archaeal ancestor independently. This invalidates the assumed necessity that evolution proceeded from a two-membrane to a one-membrane state, and therefore, the most fundamental criterion upon which the polarisation of the tree and the proposed root itself are based in this article. By contrast, no single exception is known to the different stereochemistry of archaeal (glycerol-1-phosphate-based ether isoprenoid lipids) and (eu)bacterial (glycerol-3-phosphate-based ester acyl-lipids) membranes. Therefore, the hypothesis that the root of the tree is placed between both, and that they evolved from a cenancestor with heterochiral membranes, is perfectly tenable [Peretó et al., ref. [18]]. In this situation and if the transition from (eu)bacterial to archaeal membrane chemistry were evolutionarily impossible, hypotheses sustaining that eukaryotes resulted from a symbiosis between archaea and (eu)bacteria in which (eu)bacteria contributed the membranes would be supported. In the absence of conclusive data, both rooting alternatives (within Gram negative bacteria or between archaea and bacteria) remain possible and hypothetical.

4) Proteasome
The second key criterion that is used to polarize the evolutionary transition and place the root of the tree within negibacteria is the distribution of the proteasome core particle. It is present in archaea (20S proteasome), in eukaryotes (26S proteasome) and in some, but not all, actinobacteria (high GC Gram positive). The two, α and β subunits, are distantly related to HslV, a protein widely distributed in bacteria, although absent from cyanobacteria and chlorobacteria (chloroflexi). It is hypothesised that the proteasome derives from HslV, and that its presence in eukaryotes, archaea and some actinobacteria (to the exclusion of early diverging actinobacterial lineages) demonstrates that the root is placed outside a clade eukaryotes + archaea + Gram positive bacteria (those that do not have it would have likely lost it secondarily). However, it has also been claimed that the proteasome in actinobacteria has been acquired by horizontal gene transfer (HGT) [Gille et al., ref. [47]]. Cavalier-Smith mentions this in his manuscript although, according to him, the genes are too divergent to safely conclude about their possible acquisition by transfer. Nevertheless, his strongest argument against a possible horizontal acquisition is that "Gille et al. did so [proposed the proteasome acquisition in actinobacteria by HGT] through being unaware of the evidence of a vertical relationship between actinobacteria and neomura and the likelihood that actinobacteria are much older than archaebacteria, making the assumed lateral transfer temporally impossible if it is assumed into their cenancestor (though possibly more likely if it were into the ancestor of Actinomycetales alone)". However, as we discussed before, it is impossible to say from the fossil record whether archaea and the ancestor of the actinobacteria co-existed or not. Consequently, the possibility that they did coexist and exchange genes cannot be excluded. If the proteasome was indeed acquired (together with other archaeal-like genes, see below) by actinobacteria via HGT, the root of the tree would be logically placed outside of a clade formed by archaea + eukaryotes. Therefore, in the absence of a clear answer concerning the origin (vertically inherited or horizontally acquired) of the proteasome in some actinobacteria, this character cannot be used as conclusive evidence to polarize the tree.


5) HGT vs. vertical inheritance
Both, vertical inheritance and horizontal gene transfer do occur in evolution and must be considered without a priori in trying to explain the distribution of genes in genomes. HGT may affect an important number of genes, not just single isolated cases. However, although the author accepts this in some cases (e.g. HGT of genes from hyperthermophilic archaea to Aquifex and Thermotoga or an important gain of bacterial genes in Methanosarcinales), he dismisses the possibility that a similar situation could have affected Gram positive bacteria, i.e. that archaea transferred an important number of genes to Gram positive bacteria (e.g. glycerol-1-phosphate dehydrogenase or proteasome genes) upon the single criterion that HGT "does not need to be invoked" or is "unparsimonious" as duplications and differential losses could also explain those situations. On the contrary, HGT must be invoked whenever is suspected, but then tested. The same mind openness should be applied to all cases, whether they fit or not our favourite model. Hypotheses on HGT can be tested by proper phylogenetic analyses provided that the involved genes contain enough phylogenetic signal. Hopefully, in-depth phylogenetic analyses and congruence testing will prove or disprove some or many of the hypotheses presented in this article.

6) Calmodulin, phosphatidylinositol, cholesterol
The author sustains that phosphatidylinositol is present in all eukaryotes and actinobacteria but not in other bacteria (results: Unibacteria: links between Posibacteria and Actinobacteria). Similarly, he states that calmodulin-like proteins are only present in Gram positives and eukaryotes but absent from other bacteria (Results: Monophyly of Posibacteria). However, this is not correct. Phosphatidylinositol exists also in myxobacteria [Benaissa et al 1994, J Bacteriol 176:1390]. Calmodulin-like proteins exist in a wide variety of bacteria, including, for instance, the alphaproteobacterium Rhizobium [Xi et al, PNAS 97:11114]. Furthermore, BLAST searches allow the identification of calmodulin-like proteins in many different bacteria including other proteobacteria or cyanobacteria (not shown). He also says that cholesterol biosynthesis is present in actinobacteria to the exclusion of all other bacteria. However, except for the very last step leading to cholesterol from 7,24-cholestadien-3β-ol the whole biosynthetic pathway, as well as all the intermediates, have been identified in myxobacteria [Bode et al. 2003, Mol. Microbiol. 47:471] and many other bacteria do synthesise sterols (e.g. methanotrophic proteobacteria, cyanobacteria, planctomycetes). This together with the fact that we ignore the metabolic properties of many bacterial groups (see below) makes imprudent, and to some extent inaccurate, to conclude that the cholesterol pathway is only present in actinobacteria.

7) Unknown diversity
Cavalier-Smith places a series of characters in different organismal branches and then uses this information to infer the position of the root (close to the Chloroflexi or Chlorobacteria) and also to describe a succession of evolutionary transitions in bacteria. It is a valuable attempt, but it should be also highlighted that it is an approach so far limited to the restricted fraction of prokaryotic lineages for which we have some information. Sequencing 16S rRNA genes from environmental samples has revealed many novel, divergent, clades. The number of bacterial groups equivalent to phyla in the Bergey's taxonomy without cultivated and described members exceeds that of those for which metabolic, genomic and structural information is available [Schloss & Handelsman, 2004, Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 68:686]. Recent studies on the ultrastructure and metabolism of previously uncultivated prokaryotic groups are revealing novel structural features (e.g. an outer membrane in the archaeon Ignicoccus, a nuclear-like membrane in the planctomycete Gemmata) or unforeseen metabolic capabilities (e.g. anaerobic methane oxidation by some euryarchaeota). Therefore, even if the hypotheses postulated in this manuscript proved correct, they would not be conclusive until the characteristics of the remaining prokaryotic clades were shown to fit in this scenario.


7) Ecological considerations
The author makes a number of ecological considerations that are rather weak. He appears to assimilate primary producers (organisms able to fix inorganic carbon) to photosynthesisers, while ignoring chemolithoautotrophs, which are widespread in several (eu)bacterial and archaeal phyla. I agree that if all Gram positive bacteria have always been heterotrophic, they likely co-existed with primary producers. However, this does not imply that the last cenancestor was photosynthetic. Photosynthesis is likely responsible for most of the primary production on Earth today (although accurate estimates about the deep biosphere are needed), but the first ecosystems might have been based primarily on chemolithoautotrophic organisms, such as methanogens (see comment about palaeontological evidence) or others (sulphur- or hydrogen-based autotrophic metabolisms).

8) Taxonomic rank and nomenclature
Under the evolutionary scheme proposed by Cavalier-Smith, bacteria are a kingdom and eukaryotes are nested within bacteria. Yet, instead of being considered a single phylum, as "archaebacteria" are, eukaryotes are divided in six different kingdoms. How can a taxonomic category contain sub-elements that are ranked at the same initial level? I understand that eukaryotes have a complex morphology and features. However, archaea do possess very different features too. These concern not only the replication, transcription and translation machineries (that appear not very important to the author, although being central to the cell), but also the very nature of the cell membrane (the membrane being a characteristic that appears particularly important for Cavalier-Smith). Yet, archaea are considered a single phylum, sister to the eukaryotic kingdom. Is this not excessively influenced by apparent morphological properties to the exclusion of essential, though less apparent, properties of cells?

Conclusion
In summary, the present manuscript is a substantial source of hypotheses about bacterial evolution for future testing. However, the transitions used to place the root of the tree, namely, the supposed earlier emergence of (eu)bacteria compared to the archaea based on palaeontological evidence, the obligatory and unique passage from a two-membrane ancestor to a one-membrane cell, and the putative vertical inheritance of the proteasome in archaea and eukaryotes from a Gram positive ancestor, are not unambiguously supported by the data presented, as discussed above. Furthermore, since the existing data relative to those transitions are not settled, they could equally support the generally accepted position of the root between archaea and (eu)bacteria. Clearly, determining the directionality of those transitions with certainty requires more confident data and deeper analyses. If the root of the tree cannot be unequivocally placed at present using those transitions, then the rest of the characters and transitions described in the manuscript would point exclusively to the root of the (eu)bacterial tree. In this sense, the possibility that the root of the (eu)bacterial tree lies close to, or within the Chlorobacteria is appealing. I agree with Cavalier-Smith that much attention must be paid to study this group, without forgetting to study the characters of the large bacterial diversity observed by 16S rRNA genes for which no information is available. "Put the organism back into bacteriology" is indeed crucial.
