Expanding our Understanding of the Role of the Microbiome in Health and Disease

Our understanding of the microbial side of ourselves, and its implications in health and disease, has been completely transformed in the past decade. Advances in DNA sequencing, and in the computational techniques required to understand this wealth of DNA sequences, allow us to read out the complex microbial communities that inhabit our bodies and our world at unprecedented rates. However, relating this information to function, and learning how to modify our microbiomes to improve health, remain important challenges in the field.

The present Special Issue, edited by Javier Torres and Guillermo Perez, brings together a dozen exciting articles that make broad progress in this area, spanning the entire human lifespan from infancy to adulthood, a broad range of taxa including the often-neglected viruses and protists, and disease topics ranging from asthma to cancer. These articles give a sense of the breadth of microbiome research as an emerging field, and highlight some of the opportunities to make progress in specific areas that will benefit human health.

The Issue begins where we begin, at birth, with an intriguing contribution from Cecilia Ximinez and Javier Torres on the development of the microbiome in infancy, and how microbiome development interfaces with the infant's developing immune system. This review summarizes the many factors that influence the microbiome in early life, including delivery mode, antibiotics, diet, and maternal health. Of particular interest is the extensive section on the dynamics of the developing microbiome, summarizing information from many different techniques and populations, and noting the limited amount of information available on the development of the microbiome in body sites other than the gut. An important consideration at present is the need for higher taxonomic resolution, because in the limited number of cases where such resolution is available, different strains have different effects on the host, yet these strain-level differences are largely inaccessible to amplicon-based profiling commonly used today. Correlative data in humans, and experimental data in mice and rhesus macaques, demonstrate that the microbiome plays a large role in shaping the immune system, and exposure to dust and pets may play an especially large role in determining asthma risk. The review ends with an inspiring case study of the use of synbiotics in India to reduce sepsis in newborns, which highlights the potential for low-cost large-scale microbiome interventions for promoting health internationally.

Next, Carmen Garcia-Peña and colleagues turn to the other end of the human lifespan, reviewing what is known about the microbiome and aging. This topic has attracted considerable controversy, especially in studies of the microbiome in extreme old age, because it is challenging to determine whether the last microbiome before death itself contributes to longevity, or is so senescent that the microbiome must instead be studied at earlier ages to provide insight. Although many microbiome features, such as increase in proinflammatory enterobacteria and other gut pathogens and loss of Lactobacillus sp, associated with anti-inflammatory effects, and immunological features, such as macrophage activation and loss of Peyer’s patches, are associated with old age in humans, animal studies of the type that have been highly informative in untangling microbiome-immune connections in infancy will be increasingly important in future. One intriguing feature of this review is the suggestion that changes in the oral microbiota may be involved in altered olfaction in old age, which is an important quality of life issue. Prospects for changing the microbiome to benefit health in old age and to delay degenerative diseases are also discussed, although at this point most available data are correlative and long-term cohort and intervention studies are urgently needed, despite their expensive and time-consuming nature.

In the third article, Oswaldo Partida and colleagues review the effects of parasites (both parasitic worms such as helminths, and parasitic protists) on the human body, as well as the role of the bacteria in the microbiome in fending off parasitic colonization. Although protists are rare constituents of the gut in the United States (we tested thousands of samples in the American Gut Project for protists, with very few positives other than Blastocystis sp.), they are in important public health problem in Mexico and many other countries around the world, and co-evolution with both protistan and macroscopic parasites likely played an important role in human evolution. The review highlights our important knowledge gaps in how protists interact with the rest of the microbiome, yet equally importantly highlights how over the past decade we have gained certainty that which bacteria inhabit the gut of an individual and in which proportions greatly affects both the ability of protists to colonize and the severity of the resulting disease, both in humans and in animal models. The review also highlights progress towards understanding whether loss of these co-evolved parasites has contributed to the recent rise of autoimmune disease in humans around the world, and whether restoring harmless versions of certain helminthes or protists might treat diseases ranging from allergies to inflammatory bowel disease.

We then turn from the largest of microbes, the protists, to the smallest, i.e. the viruses. The viruses are often overlooked in microbiome studies, not because they are unimportant, but because unlike cellular organisms there is no single gene that can be used for amplicon-based studies to capture all viruses. Selene Zárate and colleagues review the human virome, describing what kinds of viruses have been shown to inhabit what parts of the body, the limited information available to date on the effects of different variables such as age and diet on these viral inhabitants, and methods for studying the virome. Of particular importance are advances in next-generation sequencing and the ability to isolate and sequence nucleic acid from VLPs (virus-like particles), allowing a reference database of true viral sequences to be constructed. Viral reads from shotgun metagenomic studies can then be matched to this reference database like completing a very complex jigsaw puzzle, much easier when you have a photograph of what the whole picture is supposed to look like. An important unsolved problem highlighted in this review is the role of host genetics in regulating the mechanisms of bacteria-viral interaction, especially because many of these interactions are likely to be influenced indirectly by the host immune system. However, being able to combine the genomes of the host, the bacteria, and the viruses that attack the bacteria (bacteriophages) or the host into an overall model that predicts infection outcome will be of immense practical importance as well as of tremendous theoretical interest in understanding multiscale selection processes.

The next five articles focus on important topics relating bacteria to different aspects of human health. In the first of these, Erik van Tilberg Bernades and Marie-Clare Arietta review evidence for the hygiene hypothesis, the idea that keeping ourselves too clean (from a microbial perspective rather than from a filth perspective) may lead our immune system to turn on our own bodies, deprived of its natural targets. The original version of the hygiene hypotheses focused on transmission of pathogens within a family: importantly, this hypothesis was not supported by the data, and current thinking is that rather than exposure to pathogens per se, it is instead exposure to a wide range of beneficial microbes that is important. This review makes the important point that although this updated version of the hygiene hypothesis is consistent with many observations in developed countries, it does not apply as well to asthma in developing countries, which may be driven more by air quality and other factors. Next, Tadasu Iizumi and colleagues review the complex topic of antibiotics and the gut microbiome, focusing on the roles of different amounts and types of antibiotics administered during different stages in life. The consequences of antibiotics in promoting antimicrobial resistance are well known, but the consequences of degrading an individual’s microbiome, especially in childhood, are just beginning to be understood. Following on from this idea, Sofie Moran-Ramos and colleagues summarize recent findings on the gut microbiota and obesity, highlighting the association between low-diversity microbiomes (such as those produced by antibiotic exposure) and obesity, as well as many other factors. Interestingly, a consistent taxonomic signal of obesity in different human populations has not emerged, suggesting that instead we must search for changes in functionality rather than taxonomy. In particular, the link between reactions catalyzed by the microbiome and specific metabolic defects has been well established, and more research of this type combining animal models with epidemiology may be especially effective for untangling the complex relationships between microbes and obesity. Obesity is one of many risk factors for colon cancer, and Francisco Aviles-Jiménez and colleagues review the literature linking changes in the colorectal, gastric and oesophageal microbiome to cancer development. They also note intriguing preliminary evidence that bacteria living on the cervix may increase cervical cancer risk, although they caution that larger prospective studies will be needed in order to develop improved microbiome risk models and biomarkers for cancer prevention. Finally, moving from observing the microbiome to deliberately changing it to improve health, Christopher Staley and colleagues review the latest work, including their own, on FMT (fecal microbiota transplant). FMT is now well established as a highly effective therapy for Clostridium difficile-associated disease, which is often induced by inappropriate use of antibiotics and is in turn highly antibiotic resistant. Animal experiments have shown that FMT is effective for modifying inflammatory bowel disease and metabolic diseases, but human trials have had mixed success to date. Of particular interest given recent work on the gut-brain axis, and highly successful animal experiments, is whether FMT could be used to treat neurodegenerative or psychiatric diseases in humans. This potential to alter the microbiome for clinical treatment is among the most exciting areas of human microbiome research today.

Finally, the Special Issue returns to basic science. Jean-Christophe Lagier and colleagues offer a spirited defense of the need to culture bacteria. This topic is important because with the rise of culture-independent methods of characterizing the microbiome, notably next-generation sequencing, we have been able to detect vast numbers of bacteria, even sequence their complete genomes, and relate them to host characteristics without a detailed mechanistic understanding. However, to understand mechanisms of pathogenesis or of beneficial effects, and to understand differences among related strains or species of bacteria, it is necessary to grow them in culture. The article highlights recent examples such as the advances in understanding obtained by cultivating Akkermansia muciniphila and Fecalibacterium prausnitzii, two important species from the human gut microbiota. The former is especially interesting because the Verrucomicrobia, the phylum to which it belongs, has almost no cultured representatives yet plays critical roles in many ecosystems and perhaps in human health. In the last article, Santiago Sandoval-Motta expand our thinking beyond the human body, reviewing ecological concepts that can be used to understand microbiomes and their evolution at a broader level. They focus on the concept of the holobiont, i.e. the whole host-microbiome system, and its role as an individual (in the philosophical sense) and as a unit of natural selection. They illustrate these principles with examples taken from across metazoan phylogeny.

Taken together, these articles provide a sense of the breadth of human microbiome research, the exciting emerging applications of the microbiome in understanding and addressing human disease, but also the technical and conceptual challenges that must be addressed in order to make progress. Astonishingly, it is only a decade since the first studies on high-throughput sequencing techniques, on microbiomes and obesity, and on other topics that underpin the articles in this Special Issue were published – it is inspiring to see so much progress in such a short time, and to imagine what research will build on them over the coming decade.


