Microbiology of death

When a mammal dies, what happens? Decomposition happens. When a mammal dies its immune system shuts down, internal temperatures change, and internal bacteria begin to grow in ways impossible while under the constraints of a living host. The internal environment then experiences another major event: rupture — a break in the skin that allows air, microbes, and insects to enter, and bodily fluids to exit. A carcass releases large amounts of nitrogen into the environment, mostly in the form of ammonia, as well as carbon, phosphorous, and other nutrients important for life. A dead body becomes a hotspot of nutrients, water, and ecological activity.

How do we study mammalian decomposition? What is an anthropological research facility? You may have heard the term ‘body farm’ in the news or on popular forensic science shows like Bones or CSI. In the scientific community, these research centers are more appropriately called ‘anthropological research facilities’, and are important for studying the anthropological, ecological, and forensic science implications of mammalian decomposition. Because of the interest in human decomposition for anthropology and its practical importance in forensic science, these facilities use human donors for field experiments to test the effects of different variables on taphonomy — the processes of decomposition. Some facilities also use pigs, which are good biological proxies for humans and allow for more replicates and better control over factors such as age, weight, and sex.

What organisms are involved in decomposition? Decomposition is one of the most important ecosystem processes — if it were not efficiently accomplished by microbes, insects, and vertebrate scavengers, we would have a build-up of unpleasant organic waste on earth. Microbes play an important role in breaking down macromolecules into more simple molecules. Many bacteria that become abundant during decay, such as taxa in the family Rhizobiaceae and Chromatiaceae, are involved in the nitrogen cycle, catalyzing processes including denitrification and nitrate reduction. Additionally, members of decomposer bacterial communities contain genes encoding components of pathways that break down amino acids such as glycine, glutamate, ornithine, and lysine. The latter two amino acids become putrescine and cadaverine, respectively, which smell as good as they sound.

The decomposer microbial community is not a static group of microbes, but a rapid succession of bacteria and microbial eukaryotes (Figure 1) that compete for nutrients and consume each other. For example, initial blooms of bacteria often include fast-growing, metabolically diverse, opportunistic bacteria such as Pseudomonas. In the bacterial family Enterobacteriaceae, Proteus mirabilis appears to play an important role in attracting insects to bodies, which facilitates decomposition. Next, nematodes (microscopic worms) in the family Rhabditidae become highly abundant as they consume a bumper crop of bacterial biomass. During advanced decay, the microbial community is dominated by saprotrophic fungi in the family Mortierellaceae and bacteria in the genus Acinetobacter, both of which can break down a variety of organic compounds. Although Acinetobacter is most highly abundant during advanced decay, it is also abundant during the onset of active decay, suggesting it may utilize multiple substrate types during the decomposition process. Once a cadaver has reached the dry remains phase, we detect bacteria such as Sporosarcina, which break down low molecular weight compounds such as urea. These are just a few examples of the many microorganisms and the roles they contribute to the decomposition process.

Where do the microbial decomposers come from? Everywhere. Inside and out, we are surrounded by microbes that flourish after death. Decomposer microbes appear to mainly emerge from the rich microbial biodiversity in soils. This is especially true for the microbial eukaryotic community, such as the nematodes, fungi, and amoeba. Except for some fungi, microbial eukaryotes are usually absent during decomposition unless soil is present. As a result, decomposition tends to be slower in these settings. For example, mice decompose three times more quickly on normal soils than on soils that have been sterilized.

Bacteria, in contrast, are ubiquitous. Multiple decomposer bacteria are detectable at extremely low abundances in many environments, including the human gut and skin, in and on insects, and within soils. Acinetobacter, which is highly abundant during advanced decay, is also commonly detected on human skin and in soils, although at far lower abundances. Bacteria in the genera Wohlfahrtiimonas and Ignatzschineria are carried in by blow flies soon after death (Figure 1). Decomposer bacteria are likely ubiquitous taxa that are very good at competing for, and quickly utilizing, rich pulses of nutrients that become available only briefly.

Can microbes be used to estimate the time of death? The microbiological changes associated with death can provide a vast source of biological evidence for medicolegal death investigation. It turns out that the microbial succession that occurs during decomposition is quite clock-like. Several independent research groups have recently demonstrated that microbial succession allows for accurate estimation of the time since death, resulting in models that can predict the time of death within approximately 2 – 4 days during the initial 25 days after death. Therefore, a ‘microbial clock’ (Figure 1) may be useful for helping criminal investigators narrow the uncertainty surrounding the time of death in unattended and suspicious death scenes.

Does environment type or season affect how a person decomposes? Yes, indeed. Imagine a person dies in Texas during summer and another person dies in mid-winter in Colorado. Both would decompose quite differently. The corpse in Texas would decompose relatively rapidly because it would be used by several groups of decomposers. Microbes, insects, and scavengers would likely drive the decomposition in this setting. In contrast, the corpse in Colorado would decompose slowly, as though it were placed in a cooler. Insects may not be present and the corpse could be well preserved if it is not discovered by a scavenger. Given these differences, is it possible to calibrate a microbial clock that estimates time of death across geography and seasons? Yes, if the clock is calibrated using a temperature-based scale — that is, by accumulated degree day (the product of temperature and time) instead of calendar day. Recent research suggests that the microbial clock is robust regardless of season and soil types. Research is underway to calibrate the microbial clock by simultaneously examining the influence of environmental factors on decomposition ecology across different regions of the US during all four seasons. Eventually, similar research must be conducted on a global scale to account for environments not represented in the US.

If a body is buried or moved, can soil microbes provide clues? Yes. Soils have been used as evidence for over a century, even by Sherlock Holmes! Soil texture, mineralogy, pollen profile and, more recently, microbial DNA have all been used to characterize soils as evidence. Several recent studies employing amplicon-based sequencing of bacteria, archaea, and microbial eukaryotes have demonstrated, on a small scale, that gravesoils can be distinguished from non-decomposition soils due to the cadaver releasing an immense amount of organic material into the soil. This organic material serves as food for these microorganisms and, because there is so much of it released, gravesoils can be a unique habitat for microorganisms for over a year after decomposition. Additionally, soils from different localities can be distinguished from each other based on microbial DNA. Therefore, soil can also be used as trace evidence to link objects or people with localities.

If you die in a forest and no one is around to hear, will you make a sound? Yes, it will be the sound of microbes, insects, and scavengers munching away at the nutritious resource that is your corpse.
