DNA Supercoiling and Temperature Adaptation: A Clue to Early Diversification of Life?

Abstract.
Cellular systems to control an appropriate DNA geometry for function probably evolved simultaneously with DNA genomes. Such systems are basically DNA topoisomerases and DNA-binding proteins. Therefore, their distribution in extant organisms may be a source of information on early evolution and the nature of the last common ancestor (cenancestor). Most living beings need the strand-opening potential of negative DNA supercoiling to allow transcription and other DNA-dependent processes. Mesophiles have global negatively supercoiled DNA, essentially due to gyrase (introducing negative supercoils) in bacteria and to DNA wrapping around histone cores in eukaryotes. Mesophilic archaea, halophilic methanogens, and halophiles might use a gyrase, whereas some methanogens might use histone wrapping. The existence of these two distinct mechanisms suggests that mesophily appeared at least twice in evolution. On the other hand, only one system which is based on reverse gyrase (introducing positive supercoils) appears to be required for hyperthermophilic life. Archaeal hyperthermophiles lacking gyrase have relaxed to positively supercoiled DNA, but hyperthermophilic bacteria of the genus Thermotoga, which have both gyrase and reverse gyrase, have negative supercoiling. This suggests that reverse gyrase is necessary at least locally, but whereas these hyperthermophilic bacteria favor general melting potential and stability at critical active regions, hyperthermophilic archaea favor general linking excess and local melting. In this context, the existence of a thermophilic (60–80°C) ancestor endowed with only relaxing topoisomerases is hypothesized. Such temperatures allow a compromise between melting potential and stability, i.e., an appropriate DNA geometry for function. Subsequent duplication and functional specialization of existing DNA topoisomerases would then have facilitated adaptation to hyperthermophily and mesophily in archaea and bacteria, respectively. If reverse gyrase is an ancient character in hyperthermophilic bacteria, the cenancestor would have already been a hyperthermophile. Histone sequence homology and similarities of nucleosome structural dynamics suggest that eukaryotes inherited this system for DNA structural homeostasis from methanogenic euryarchaea. Some mesophilic archaea would have improved their adaptability to mesophily by importing gyrase from bacteria.

Introduction
The appearance of a DNA world must have been paralleled by the development of systems to maintain the
integrity and functionality of DNA molecules. DNA topoisomerases and DNA-binding proteins (histone and
histone-like) are the key components of such systems.
Histones are found in eukaryotes and some archaea and
they allow DNA wrapping around nucleosomal cores
(Kornberg 1977; Starich et al. 1996; Luger et al. 1997;
Pereira et al. 1997). Histone-like proteins are widespread
in the three domains of life, but unlike true histones, they
cannot wrap DNA. Although histone-like proteins are
not generally sequence homologues, they do share several properties, being small, generally basic, nonspecific,
DNA bending, and unwinding, normally via the minor
groove (Drlica and Rouvie`re-Yaniv 1987; Schmid 1990;
Laine et al. 1991; Grove et al. 1996; Robinson et al.
1998). DNA topoisomerases are essential to disentangle
DNA strands or duplexes, being charged to resolve topological problems arising from DNA-derived processes.
Thus, they intervene in a high variety of cellular functions, ranging from transcription, recombination, and
replication (including decatenation and segregation of
chromosomes) to the regulation of DNA supercoiling
and maintenance of genome stability (Wang et al. 1990;
Drlica 1992; Luttinger 1995; Wang 1996). DNA topoisomerases are mechanistically classified as type I or type
II, depending on their ability to act via a single-strand or
a double-strand break. In turn, each mechanistic type
groups two distinct phylogenetic families (see Table 1)
(Forterre et al. 1994, 1996; Wang 1996; Bergerat et al.
1997). In Archaea, Eukarya, and Bacteria, type I and II
enzymes are indispensable and coexist in the cell, which
suggests that both mechanistic types evolved before domain diversification.

The hypothesis of a hot origin of life is favored nowadays based on two kinds of evidence. Phylogenetically,
the hyperthermophilic nature of deep-branching archaea
and bacteria suggest that their ancestor was also a hyperthermophile (Woese 1987; Wa¨chtersha¨user 1988;
Woese et al. 1990; Pace 1991; Stetter 1995, 1996). In
agreement, geological evidence suggests that when life
arose (3.8–4.2 Ga), Earth environments resembled hyperthermophilic biotopes today (Baross and Hoffman
1985; Nisbet 1985; Shock 1996). A hot autotrophic origin appeared specially supported after the root of the
phylogenetic tree of life was placed in the bacterial
branch (Woese et al. 1990; Brown and Doolittle 1995;
Baldauf et al. 1996). Although the root of the tree and the
hot origin of life are still controversial (Forterre 1996),
some authors have indicated the need to distinguish between the conditions in which the origin of life took
place and those in which the last common ancestor or
cenancestor was thriving (Miller and Lazcano 1995). Hyperthermophilic or not, the cenancestor was already quite
complex, as can be deduced from comparative analyses
of archaeal, bacterial, and eukaryal genomes (Edgell and
Doolittle 1997; Olsen and Woese 1997). A more or less
long period of evolution in between, accompanied by the
possibility of significant environmental changes, is therefore implicit.
One of the most relevant features of hyperthermophiles is the possession of the special DNA topoisomerase reverse gyrase, which has been consistently found in
all bacteria and archaea growing optimally above 80°C
(Duguet 1995). The discovery of this novel activity, capable of creating positive supercoils in DNA molecules,
not only opened up a discussion about its likely role in
stabilizing DNA at high temperature, but also fed some
evolutionary debates. Since the gene for reverse gyrase
appears to result from a fusion event between two preexisting genes (a putative helicase + topoisomerase), the
primitiveness of hyperthermophiles was questioned (Forterre et al. 1995). A proposal for the evolution of this
enzyme in the course of a reduction process from a mesophile to a hypothetic hyperthermophilic common ancestor to prokaryotes was formulated (Forterre 1995).
However, as discussed in this report, the phylogenetic
distribution of reverse gyrase and other DNA topoisomerase-based systems for DNA homeostasis, namely, gyrase- and nucleosome-based systems, suggests that mesophily appeared at least twice in evolution, possibly
later than hyperthermophily. I speculate on the existence
of a thermophilic ancestor (60–80°C) lacking supercoilintroducing topoisomerases (gyrase and reverse gyrase)
with an appropriate DNA conformation for function being spontaneously generated. Strategies involving specialization of DNA topoisomerases, as well as histone
wrapping, evolved subsequently to regulate DNA structure improving the adaptability of organisms to different
temperature niches.
The Role of DNA Supercoiling in Living Beings
DNA Supercoiling, DNA Topology, and
Topoisomerase Function
DNA supercoiling is currently used to approximate the
spatial structure of DNA molecules, or, more precisely,
their geometry. However, the geometry of the DNA molecule in vivo is difficult to assess, because it is influenced
by different factors, for instance, protein binding. This is
the reason why, as an easily measurable topological
property, the linking number (Lk) is estimated in practice. Lk represents the number of links between the two
strands of the double helix and is a constant value for a
covalently closed DNA molecule (ccDNA). Lk can be
decomposed into two geometrical parameters that determine the shape of the molecule in the space: Lk 4 Tw
+ Wr. The twist (Tw) represents the wrapping of one
strand around the other, being directly related to the path
of the helix, and the writhe (Wr) corresponds to the coiling of the helix’s axis in space, i.e., supercoiling (for a
review, see Bates and Maxwell 1993). For a ccDNA, any
change in Tw or Wr can affect the other geometrical
component, but not Lk. Lk can be altered only by a
process of cutting, passing through, and resealing DNA
strands or duplexes, i.e., a topoisomerase activity. Under
these premises, DNA supercoiling and DNA topology
(Lk) are straightforwardly related. Both parameters are
sometimes employed indiscriminately to describe DNA
geometry in living cells (especially in bacteria, where
DNA–protein binding is not so extensive as in eukaryotic
nucleosomes; see below). The underlying basis for this is
that Tw cannot change too much at global levels (only
locally) if general functionality is to be maintained (important changes in Tw would lead to denaturation or
inactive structures).
The geometry of the DNA molecule in the cell can
also be directly affected by factors other than Lk changes
induced by topoisomerase action. Among these, physical
parameters, such as salt or temperature, can make DNA
an environmental sensor (McClellan et al. 1990; Higgins
et al. 1990). Also important are the attachment to histones or other DNA-binding proteins (Drlica and Rouvie`re-Yaniv 1987; Travers 1994) and protein tracking during DNA-dependent processes (Kornberg and Lorch
1992; Dro¨ge 1993; Wang and Lynch 1993; Wang 1996).
None of these factors can modify the topology of a
ccDNA molecule per se; however, they can do it indirectly by attracting topoisomerases to release geometrically induced tensions. Most probably the primary function for which topoisomerases evolved was the release of
local torsional stress generated during transcription, replication, and recombination. In addition to the resolution
of topological problems during those processes, DNA
topoisomerases are responsible, alone or with auxiliary
DNA-binding proteins, for the maintenance of global
levels of DNA supercoiling (Drlica 1992; Luttinger
1995; Wang 1996).
Optimal DNA Geometry and Supercoiling Levels in
Present-Day Organisms
It has been hypothesized that a precise overall geometry
of the DNA molecule exists where the appropriate relative distances are maintained so that the correct interaction with all proteins and factors involved in DNAdependent processes is assured (Forterre et al. 1996).
This hypothesis was originally based on the different
DNA topologies found in living organisms. In all mesophiles belonging to the three domains of life, DNA is
negatively supercoiled, with specific linking differences
(relative measures of DLk) between −0.07 and −0.05 in
vitro (Worcel and Burgi 1972; Germond et al. 1975;
Wang 1987; Sioud et al. 1988; Charbonnier and Forterre
1994). On the other hand, in hyperthermophilic archaea,
plasmid DNA is from relaxed to positively supercoiled,
with specific linking differences from −0.006 to +0.03
(Charbonnier and Forterre 1994; Lo´pez-Garcı´a and For
terre 1997). A linking deficit in mesophiles would provide the required activation energy for DNA-dependent
processes, compensating for the physical effect of lower
temperatures, which would tend to increase the twist. On
the other hand, a linking excess in hyperthermophiles
would counteract the denaturing effect of high temperatures (Fig. 1) (Forterre et al. 1996). However, the 846-bp
plasmid pRQ7 from the hyperthermophilic bacterium
Thermotoga sp. RQ7 has recently been shown to be
negatively supercoiled (Guipaud et al. 1997), suggesting
that levels of negative supercoiling depend exclusively
on the presence or absence of gyrase (see below). The Lk
differences between archaeal and bacterial hyperthermophiles suggest that a local appropriate geometry is necessary but also sufficient for life, provided that measures
against DNA denaturation or degradation exist.
Nonetheless, the hypothesis of an optimal DNA geometry has to be interpreted in relative terms. Indeed, for
any given organism global levels of supercoiling are under homeostatic control and may vary (within certain
limits) depending on, for instance, growth conditions
(Balke and Gralla 1987; Jensen et al. 1995) or different
environmental stimuli including shifts in osmolarity
(Hsieh et al. 1991b), oxygen concentration (Hsieh et al.
1991a), pH (Karem and Foster 1993), and temperature
within the growth range of the organism (Goldstein and
Drlica 1984). These environmentally induced changes
have been suggested to control overall gene expression
(Higgins et al. 1990; Dorman 1995). Global supercoiling
changes are known to act locally and regulate the transcription of many genes having promoters sensitive to
supercoiling (Wang and Lynch 1993). In hyperthermophilic archaea, plasmid DNA supercoiling also varies
during growth and depending on temperature and may
even reach negative values (Lo´pez-Garcı´a and Forterre
1997).
It can be concluded that a certain degree of negative
supercoiling is, at least locally, necessary for active DNA
in most, if not all, organisms, since it provides the energy
of activation required to open both DNA strands for transcription or replication (Weintraub 1985; Wang 1996).
The only possible exception would be hyperthermophilic
archaea, for which contradictory reports from in vitro
transcription systems exist. Whereas negative supercoiling seems to be required in Pyrococcus (Soares et al.
1998; C Hethke, M Thomm, and P Forterre, unpublished
results), template topology has no influence at all at normal growth temperatures in Sulfolobus (Bell et al. 1998).
Therefore, in these organisms high temperatures may actually provide the strand-opening potential needed. However, negative supercoiling is indispensable for transcription at lower temperatures (Bell et al. 1998). Thus,
whereas in mesophiles global negative supercoiling is
essential to facilitate opening of DNA strands, in hyperthermophiles, the key problem is the opposite, to prevent
excessive denaturation by high temperatures. Archaeal
hyperthermophiles generate global linking excess,
whereas bacterial hyperthermophiles may avoid excessive local melting: i.e., whereas archaea favor general
stability and local melting, bacteria favor melting potential and local stability at critical active regions (see below).
Systems for Homeostatic Control of
DNA Supercoiling
Gene and genome sequencing in combination with biochemical studies are providing a more complete and unexpected picture of the distribution of DNA-binding proteins and topoisomerases in the living world. I comment
briefly on the occurrence of key proteins generating the
respective global levels of supercoiling in the three domains of life, namely, gyrase, reverse gyrase, and histones (summarized in Figs. 1 and 2).
Bacteria
All known bacteria have negatively supercoiled DNA.
Global DNA supercoiling in bacteria is essentially due to
the concerted action of DNA topoisomerases, although
histone-like proteins such as HU can help to fine-tune
supercoiling levels, for instance, during thermal stress
(Ogata et al. 1997; Mizushima et al. 1997). Most studies
derive from mesophilic bacteria, where control of DNA
supercoiling implies the antagonistic action of gyrase,
introducing negative superturns, and a type I topoisomerase with the opposite effect (protein v) (Drlica 1992;
Wang 1996). There are other topoisomerases in bacteria,
although apparently they do not have a major role in
maintaining general levels of supercoiling. These are
type I topoisomerase III (Topo III) and type II topoisomerase IV (Topo IV), both carrying only relaxing activities
(Luttinger 1995; Wang 1996) (Table 1). Topo IV was
previously thought to be widespread in all bacteria, but it
turned out to be restricted to some branches (Fig. 2) (see
below and Huang 1996; Kaneko and Tabata 1997; Guipaud et al. 1997).
In hyperthermophilic bacteria of the genus Thermotoga, where gyrase and reverse gyrase coexist, plasmid
negative supercoiling is detected (Guipaud et al. 1997).
This implies that gyrase is more active or efficient than
reverse gyrase at normal growth temperatures. The function of reverse gyrase in vivo is not fully understood, but
its recurrent presence in hyperthermophiles suggests an
essential role at high temperatures. If not for the maintenance of relaxed or positively supercoiled overall
DNA, it may be related to resistance to increased temperatures or to the prevention of DNA denaturation during critical openings of the double helix (Guipaud et al.
1997). Indeed, at least in hyperthermophilic archaea
lacking a masking gyrase activity, an increased reverse
gyrase activity and induction of plasmid positive supercoiling is observed during heat shock and during growth
at supraoptimal temperatures (Lo´pez-Garcı´a and Forterre
1997).
Eukaryotes
All eukaryotes are mesophiles or slight thermophiles and
have negatively supercoiled DNA constrained by nucleosomes. The eukaryotic strategy to generate global levels
of supercoiling is radically different from that used by
bacteria. Protein binding not only helps to adjust precise
levels of supercoiling induced by topoisomerases, but is
necessary to generate high levels of negative supercoiling. Eukaryotes carry only relaxing DNA topoisomerases
(Table 1), and indeed, bulk chromatin is not under torsional stress (Sinden et al. 1980). Negative supercoiling
is therefore generated, and restrained, by DNA wrapping
around the histone core, followed by relaxation of the
internucleosomal tension by topoisomerases (Saavedra
and Huberman 1986). The final result is that, if one
removes histones and topoisomerases, whole DNA is
negatively supercoiled to about the same extent as DNA
from prokaryotic mesophiles (Wang 1987). Other eukaryotic DNA-binding proteins, such as the high mobility-group proteins (HMGs), exist. They are involved in
DNA bending, having a function similar to that of bacterial HU and IHF proteins (Bustin et al. 1990; Grove et
al. 1996).
Archaea
In the domain Archaea, studies about the regulation of
DNA supercoiling are in their infancy, but already the
situation seems more complex. Levels of supercoiling
may vary from highly negative to positive, and the type
and content of DNA topoisomerases and DNA-binding
proteins suggest similarities to both bacterial and eukaryotic machineries (Figs. 1 and 2).
Thus, an involvement of DNA topoisomerases similar
to that of mesophilic bacteria for control of supercoiling
could exist in halophilic euryarchaea, since they have
highly negatively supercoiled DNA (Mojica et al. 1994)
and may carry a bacterial-like gyrase. At least, the presence of bacterial gyr-like genes has been reported
(Holmes and Dyall-Smith 1991), as well as sensitivity to
low doses of the gyrase inhibitor novobiocin (Sioud et al.
1988).
All hyperthermophilic archaea studied so far have a
reverse gyrase and relaxed to positively supercoiled
DNA. In crenarchaea, small DNA-binding proteins exist
which have features similar to those of bacterial (HU,
etc.) or eukaryal (HMGs) histone-like proteins, including
DNA unwinding proteins, such as Sac/Sso7 and relatives
(Lo´pez-Garcı´a et al. 1998; Mai et al. 1998; Robinson et
al. 1998). In these organisms, control of supercoiling
could involve the antagonistic action of reverse gyrase
and one relaxing activity (Forterre and Elie 1993; Forterre et al. 1996). Among the relaxing topoisomerase
candidates that are widespread in both archaeal kingdoms, only a type II enzyme exists, topoisomerase VI
(Topo VI) (Table 1). Topo VI, first purified from Sulfolobus shibatae (Bergerat et al. 1994), is the prototype
of a new phylogenetic family characteristic of archaea
and with some eukaryal protein homologues (Bergerat et
al. 1997). Regarding type I topoisomerases with exclusively relaxing activities, Topo III-like genes have been
detected in both archaeal branches (Bult et al. 1996; FitzGibbon et al. 1997), and the enzymatic activity may have
been detected previously in archaea (Slesarev et al.
1991). Also, Topo V, a biochemical member of the “eukaryotic” IB subfamily, has been described in Methanopyrus kandlerii (Slesarev et al. 1993) (Table 1), but
whether or not its presence is widespread in archaea is
not known.
Interestingly, early-branching euryarchaea possess
true histones (Fig. 2). These have been found in hyperthermophilic and some mesophilic methanogens (Methanococcales and Methanobacteriales), as well as Thermococcales (Grayling et al. 1994; Sandman et al. 1994;
Ronimus and Musgrave 1996; Darcy et al. 1995). However, histones are present neither in Thermoplasma,
where a protein homologous to the bacterial HU, HTa,
was described (DeLange et al. 1981; Grayling et al.
1994), nor in Methanomicrobiales, where MC1 is the
most abundant histone-like protein (Chartier et al. 1988,
1989). In haloarchaea, a gene coding for a MC1-like
protein was found (Darkacheva and Kagramanova 1994;
A. Mankin, personal communication), but whether or not
histones occur is unknown. Histones have never been
detected in crenarchaea, despite intensive searches and
the fact that these proteins are very abundant in the cell.
Archaeal histones not only exhibit sequence homology
with eukaryotic ones, but also form nucleosomal structures with canonical histone folds (Starich et al. 1996).
Archaeal nucleosomes have recently been found to constrain negative supercoils at physiological conditions of
salt and temperature (Musgrave et al. 1999). They could
help to provide the local melting necessary for DNAdependent processes under a control situation, i.e., in a
context of general linking excess. Moreover, they could
have a primordial role in mesophilic euryarchaea having
lost reverse gyrase and still devoid of gyrase. In this case,
some archaea would use a “eukaryotic” strategy for homeostasis of DNA structure (see below).
Did Early Diversification of Life Correlate with
Adaptation to Distinct Temperature Niches?
An appropriate DNA geometry for function must have
been conserved throughout evolution, keeping the balance between stability and melting potential. Since
DNA-binding proteins and topoisomerases are essential
components of the machinery controlling DNA topology,
their phylogenetic and environmental distribution is basic to understanding their functional evolution and putative role in temperature adaptation. In this section, I comment on these aspects, using preliminary conclusions to
trace some hypothetical evolutionary pathways.
Reverse Gyrase and Hyperthermophily
An interesting example is constituted by type I topoisomerases, in general, and reverse gyrase, in particular.
Topoisomerases evolved to resolve topological problems
in nucleic acid molecules. Early replicative genomes
might have been composed of small linear nucleic acids
before the evolution of any topoisomerase activity. Locally generated tensions might have been released spontaneously (see below and Fig. 4, bottom). In this context,
type I topoisomerases, simpler than type II enzymes and
ATP-independent, likely evolved first, which could contribute to size increase of small replicons. This might
have occurred before the DNA era, during a putative
RNA-protein world. Moreover, type I enzymes might
have played an essential role facilitating the transition
between both RNA and DNA-based worlds, particularly
Topo III-like enzymes. Not only are these ubiquitous in
the three domains of life, but also the Escherichia coli
Topo III has been shown to be a true RNA topoisomerase
(DiGate and Marians 1992; Wang et al. 1996). They
could have supplied an initial segregating activity. In
fact, Topo III is able in vitro to decatenate and could be
involved in chromosomal replication or in mRNA decatenation during transcription (DiGate and Marians 1992;
Wang et al. 1996). Its absence may be lethal in some
cases (Li and Wang 1998).
Once this elementary relaxing function was in place,
duplication, fusion with an helicase domain, and recruitment of a new function (generation of positive supercoils) could have resulted in reverse gyrase and allowed
hyperthermophily. Since reverse gyrase is found in both
hyperthermophilic bacteria and archaea, it may have
been present in their common ancestor. However, the
possibility remains for a horizontal transfer from archaea
to bacteria (see below).
Gyrase and Other Type II Topoisomerases
Type II topoisomerases are more complex than type I
enzymes, often being composed of two kinds of subunits
and having ATP-dependent activity (Table 1). With the
exception of gyrase, all type II enzymes can only relax
positive and negative supercoils and are specifically involved in chromosome segregation and decatenation
upon replication or recombination. That is the case for
bacterial Topo IV, eukaryotic Topo II and, most likely,
archaeal Topo VI (Luttinger 1995; Wang 1996; Bergerat
et al. 1997). Chromosome segregation is an essential
function in increasingly larger genomes, and despite the
possible involvement of Topo III enzymes, this role
seems to be carried out essentially by type II topoisomerases (Wang 1996). The primary function of type II
enzymes may thus have been chromosome disentangling
upon replication, although their evolution could have
provided for a better efficiency for the removal of supercoils as well.
As in the case of type I enzymes, one may hypothesize that once the primary function (chromosome decatenation/segregation) was in place, duplication and specialization in a second function, such as the active
introduction of negative supercoils (gyrase), were allowed. Indeed, gyrase is a complex enzyme with at least
four functions including maintenance of supercoiling, facilitation of replication and transcription by generating
negative supercoils in front of the respective complexes,
removal of knots, and DNA bending and folding (Drlica
and Zhao 1997). In the absence of ATP, gyrase relaxes
negative supercoils. This adds regulatory possibilities to
the intracellular control of supercoiling levels as a response to environmental changes such as substrate depletion, osmolarity or temperature shifts (Jensen et al. 1995;
Workum et al. 1996). Gyrase can also decatenate, but E.
coli Topo IV is more than 100 times active for this function and is more likely to carry out this role in vivo
(Zechiedrich and Cozzarelli 1995). The gyration activity,
which constitutes its major difference from Topo IV, is
due to its ability to wrap DNA around itself. As a matter
of fact, the removal of the C-terminal end of the GyrA
subunit converts the gyrase to a relaxing Topo IV-like
enzyme (Kampranis and Maxwell 1996).
Most studies on gyrase and Topo IV have been performed using E. coli as a model. However, complete
genome sequencing is revealing striking differences in
type II topoisomerase gene contents in bacteria. Topo IV
genes (parE and parC, homologous to gyrB and gyrA,
respectively) are not detected in T. maritima (Guipaud et
al. 1997; http://www.tigr.org). Only one set of genes is
present in Aquifex aeolicus (Deckert et al. 1998), although based on gene similarity it is not clear whether
they code for a Topo IV or a gyrase (Guipaud, personal
communication). Also, only one set of genes can be retrieved from the genome sequence of Deinococcus radiodurans (http://www.tigr.org). In these organisms gyrase must be the decatenase as well. The absence of Topo
IV in many bacteria could well explain the failure to
amplify gyrA-like sequences in the radioresistant micrococci and Thermus, green sulfur, green nonsulfur, and
Planctomyces (Huang 1996). These organisms appear to
branch slightly earlier in the bacterial bush (Fig. 2) (Pace
1997). An interesting case is the cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp., whose genome carries two gyrA sequences (one more similar to its Topo IV homologue
parC) but only one gyrB (Kaneko and Tabata 1997). This
suggests that a duplication event took place just before,
or during, the differentiation of cyanobacteria and that in
these organisms, GyrB could interact with both GyrAand ParC-like proteins to perform two already individualized functions (GyrB + GyrA, a gyrase to control
overall levels of supercoiling, and GyrB + ParC-like, to
decatenate chromosomes). Later in the bacterial branch, a
second duplication event, involving gyrB, could have led
to the complete independence of both enzymatic functions and to a higher versatility for the colonization of
meso- and psychrophilic environments. GyrA is indeed a
cold-shock protein (Jones et al. 1992). Interestingly,
many of the bacteria with only one putative complete set
of type II topoisomerases can be quite thermophilic.
Thermus spp. can grow at up to 85°C, and cyanobacteria
and photosynthetic bacteria at up to 73°C (Brock 1986).
Another interesting feature on topoisomerase distribution is that the type II enzymes present in earlybranching bacteria and archaea belong to different phy
logenetic families. Topo VI is the only type II
topoisomerase detected so far in hyperthermophilic crenarchaea and most hyperthermophilic euryarchaea (Fig.
1). However, the respective B subunits of Topo VI and
gyrase still exhibit some homology (Bergerat et al.
1997). This could indicate that at the time of the prokaryotic ancestor, a primitive type II topoisomerase activity existed, involving the interaction of a proto-B subunit with other DNA-interacting proteins able to cut and/
or ligate DNA. The speciation of the domains Archaea
and Bacteria implied also the speciation of both topoisomerase families (IIA and IIB; Table 1). This hypothesis would be in agreement with a primitive DNA replication system at the time of the cenancestor (Edgell and
Doolittle 1997; Olsen and Woese 1997).
In the euryarchaeal branch, halophiles have most
probably imported a gyrase from bacteria (likely Gram
positive). Indeed, horizontal transfer seems to have had a
profound impact in archaeal evolution (Hilario and
Gogarten 1993; Gogarten 1994, 1995; Doolittle 1998).
Haloarchaeal gyrase genes branch in the middle of bacterial ones (Forterre et al. 1994), and these organisms
seem to have acquired other bacterial genes in this way,
possibly from Gram-positive bacteria and cyanobacteria
(Home et al. 1988; Altekar and Rajopalan 1990; Gogarten 1995; Doolittle 1998). Communities integrated by
cyanobacteria and halophiles are widespread, and close
feeding interactions between them were shown to occur
in cyanobacterial mats (Zviagintseva et al. 1995). Gyrase
import might have taken place earlier in euryarchaea,
since Archaeoglobus fulgidus already contains gyr homologues, although the great similarity to the Thermotoga gyrase (Guipaud 1998) would rather suggest an independent horizontal transfer. Also, the key enzyme for
its unique bacterial-like capacity to reduce sulfate seems
to have been imported from sulfate-reducing bacteria
(Doolittle 1998). Archaeoglobus, Thermotoga, and sulfate-reducing bacterial genera are found extensively in
the same biotopes and frequently coisolated (L’Haridon
et al. 1995; Hugenholtz et al. 1998).
Histone Wrapping: On the Way to Eukaryal Chromatin
As mentioned previously, a second way to generate extensive negative supercoiling is DNA wrapping around
histone cores. This system is typically used by eukaryotes, which possess only relaxing type I and II DNA
topoisomerases (Table 1).
Eukaryotic nucleosomes are formed by an octamer
built upon a (H3–H4)2 tetramer plus two H2A–H2B
dimers. The roles of the tetramer and dimers in today’s
nucleosome are very different. Whereas the tetramer is
critical for the first interaction with DNA and to determine nucleosome positioning, the H2A–H2B dimers assemble later, having a likely role in transcriptional regulation. H2A and H2B probably evolved later than H3–
H4, allowing further condensation of nucleosomal DNA
(Ramakrishnan 1995). The tetramer (H3–H4)2 can harbor positive and negative supercoils without affecting
DNA twist (Hamiche et al. 1996). The transition between
both states occurs rapidly, can be triggered by thermal
fluctuations, and is due to a conformational change of the
tetramer to accommodate the sense of DNA coiling (Fig.
3). This change takes place only in the absence of H2A–
H2B dimers (their assemblage would block the lefthanded structure), and a role in transcriptional regulation
for these highly dynamic transitions has been proposed
(Hamiche et al. 1996).
Although archaeal histones were initially reported to
form “reverse nucleosomes” by positive DNA wrapping
(Musgrave et al. 1991), they apparently constrain nega
tive supercoils under physiological conditions (Musgrave et al. 1999). With the exception of Methanopyrus,
where two histone folds are fused in the same polypeptide (Slesarev et al. 1998), a shift from negative to positive wrapping can also be observed in archaeal nucleosomes depending on salt concentration (Musgrave et al.
1999). Therefore, sequence homology, structure, and
nucleosomal dynamics point out to a common origin for
archaeal and eukaryal nucleosomes. In addition to the
essential packaging function of eukaryotic nucleosomes,
support for a more dynamic role via modification of local
supercoiling in transcriptional regulation is increasing
(Wolffe and Pruss 1996; Luger et al. 1997; Luger and
Richmond 1998). The same may be true for archaeal
nucleosomes (Musgrave et al. 1999). In fact, based on
the similarity of archaeal and eukaryotic histones to the
CBF family of eukaryotic transcription factors, a parallel
origin of the nucleosome core and eukaryotic transcription from archaea has already been proposed (Ouzounis
and Kyrpides 1996).
From the beginning, the physical interconversion
from right- to left-handedness may have had a significant
role in transcriptional regulation in archaeal and eukaryal
nucleosomes. Yet nucleosome formation may have also
been exploited to colonize mesophilic environments in
archaea devoid of gyrase, because it offers sufficiently
powerful machinery capable of generating melting potential at lower temperatures. In fact, looking at presentday mesophiles, they must have one of the two described
systems to generate extensive negative supercoiling, either a gyrase (in bacteria and some archaea) or a histonewrapping system (eukaryotes and some euryarchaea)
(Figs. 1 and 2). The occurrence of these two systems
strongly suggests an independent adaptation to mesophily, i.e., mesophily appeared at least twice in evolution.
A second important conclusion is that the histonebased system used by a restricted range of methanogenic
euryarchaea possibly to package DNA, regulate transcription, and generate negative supercoiling may have
preceded the eukaryotic system. This constitutes a strong
argument favoring recently published symbiotic hypotheses for the origin of eukaryotes in which an archaeal
methanogenic partner is involved (Martin and Mu¨ller
1998; Moreira and Lo´pez-Garcı´a 1998), in particular, a
histone-carrying methanogen having already lost reverse
gyrase (Fig. 2).
An evolutionary pathway in the euryarchaeal branch
can be hypothesized as follows. A gradient from hyperthermophily to mesophily (and mesophilic halophily)
can be traced along this phylogenetic lineage (Fig. 3).
Hyperthermophiles possess a reverse gyrase required for
preventing general denaturation, whereas negative supercoiling (required for DNA transcription and other processes) is provided by nucleosome formation. Some
methanogens lost reverse gyrase and occupied less thermophilic niches. That may be the case for mesophiles
from the orders Methanococcales and Methanobacteriales. The closely related halophilic methanogens (Methanomicrobiales) and halophiles, which are mesophiles,
may have imported gyrase from bacteria. Since gyrase
seems to be strongly advantageous for mesophilic adaptation, these organisms may have lost histones and substituted them with histone-like proteins (like MC1 proteins) conferring more dynamic interactions. The
genome as a whole would work much more in a bacterial-like fashion. This could also be the case for Thermoplasma, possessing the HU-like HTa. This protein
may have a bacterial origin, and although the topoisomerase content of Thermoplasmales is still unknown, a
gyrase could exist, since they are sensitive to novobiocin
(Yasuda et al. 1995). Thermoplasma acidophilum was
isolated from acid coal piles, but Thermoplasma relatives
have recently been found to be much more widespread
than thought, sharing the same environments as Methanomicrobiales and halophiles, for instance, in coastal salt
marshes (Munson et al. 1997). The related Methanomicrobiales and halophiles generally thrive in salty biotopes of this kind. Interestingly, high osmolarity and high
salt shocks are related to an increase in negative supercoiling (Hsieh et al. 1991b; Mojica et al. 1994), which
could constitute an additional need to gain a gyrase.
A Thermophilic Ancestor
The generation of linking excess or deficit at general or
local levels in DNA genomes may be essential for temperature adaptation. Hyperthermophiles utilize reverse
gyrase to prevent denaturation, whereas mesophiles use
gyrase or histone-mediated mechanisms. In this sense,
mesophily appears to be an adaptation at least as complex as hyperthermophily, having appeared at least
twice. Reverse gyrase likely evolved earlier (or at the
latest at the same time) than gyrase or histone-wrapping
mechanisms to control global supercoiling. One appealing possibility is that the ancestor was a thermophile, still
devoid of important supercoil-introducing activities,
thriving around 60–80°C, in which the optimal DNA
structure for function was generated spontaneously (Fig.
4). This configuration would be the most energetically
favored at those temperatures, corresponding to a compromise between stability and melting capability. Thermophilic conditions would be necessary to provide the
energy of activation supplied by an excess of negative
supercoiling in mesophiles, while sufficient to prevent
the risk of denaturation that higher temperatures would
induce. Small DNA-binding proteins likely played an
important role at this stage. They possibly stabilized the
genome, but also helped its biological activity due to
their bending/unwinding properties.
Two theoretical possibilities can be envisionned for
the further evolution of this thermophile (Fig. 4). The
first would imply the evolution of reverse gyrase in the
archaeal lineage, leading to a hyperthermophilic archaeal
ancestor and a subsequent horizontal transfer to bacteria.
The cenancestor would then be a thermophile. In the
second possibility, reverse gyrase would have evolved
prior to the diversification of the prokaryotic domains,
and the cenancestor would already be a hyperthermophile. In this case, bacterial reverse gyrase would be a
remnant of early prokaryotic history.
In the hyperthermophilic lineage leading to archaea,
the euryarchaeal branch developed histones serving initially as stabilizing and bending/unwinding proteins,
similar to crenarchaeal and bacterial histone-like proteins. The capacity of histones to interact and form
higher-order structures that wrap DNA was further exploited for adaptation to less thermophilic environments,
being the origin of the eukaryotic-like genome lifestyle.
Conclusions
Temperature and other physical parameters affect DNA
conformation, which must be under homeostatic control
to allow the correct interaction with all proteins involved
in DNA-based processes. The basic components of systems to regulate DNA topology in all organisms are
DNA topoisomerases and DNA-binding proteins. Therefore, their phylogenetic distribution and particular functions are a worthy source of information about early
evolution and temperature adaptation, especially concerning a putative hyperthermophilic cenancestor.
Hyperthermophilic life (optimal temperatures above
80°C) requires the possession of reverse gyrase, which is
probably essential only at critical regions, since hyperthermophilic bacteria appear to have general levels of
gyrase-induced negative supercoiling. This would be in
agreement with the requirement of a certain degree of
negative supercoiling to initiate transcription and other
processes. In hyperthermophilic archaea lacking gyrase,
relaxing to positively supercoiled DNA would prevent
global denaturation, but should then provide negative
supercoiling at local regions, at least when the environmental temperature decreases (Bell et al. 1998). This
could be done in crenarchaea with the help of unwinding
proteins such as the Sac/Sso7 proteins (Lo´pez-Garcı´a et
al. 1998; Mai et al. 1998; Robinson et al. 1998) and in
euryarchaea by histones, which generate negative supercoiling at physiological conditions (Musgrave et al.
1999). This suggests that histones originally evolved to
perform a similar function as actual histone-like proteins,
i.e., general stabilization, bending, and unwinding, being
used later for more complex functions.
Mesophilic life requires general levels of negative
DNA supercoiling, despite an additional local unwinding
to initiate DNA activity. Those levels are generated either by gyrase (all bacteria and some archaea) or by DNA
wrapping around a histone core (eukaryotes and some
euryarchaea), implying independent adaptations to lower
temperatures.
In this report, I have speculated on the existence of a
thermophilic ancestor thriving under thermophilic conditions (60–80°C), which was already endowed with relaxing type I and primitive type II topoisomerases. Thermophilic temperatures supplied the energy of activation
required for opening DNA strands without inducing excessive denaturation. Hyperthermophily would have appeared first as reverse gyrase evolved, and the cenancestor would have been a thermophile or already a
hyperthermophile. On the bacterial branch, duplication
of gyrase genes and functional specialization (decatenation—control of supercoiling) led to an increased adaptability to mesophilic conditions. Consistent with a hyperthermophilic archaeal ancestor devoid of gyrase,
hyperthermophilic archaea seem to use proteins to aid
DNA unwinding in a general context of linking excess.
The DNA-binding proteins that developed in the euryarchaeal branch, i.e., histones, turned out to be very efficient in generating negative supercoiling. Later, as they
had to face less thermophilic environments, this histone
potential was exploited to create high general levels of
negative supercoiling, which could be at the very origin
of the eukaryotic nucleosomal dynamics. Halophilic
methanogens and halophiles, well adapted to mesophily
and high salt, have probably acquired a gyrase from bacteria living in the same environments, and they replaced
nucleosomes by a bacterial-like system of expression and
general chromosomal dynamics.
These hypothetical pathways of evolution can be at
least partially tested, since several predictions can be
made for present-day organisms. Some of them have
already been formulated, such as the presence of a putative gyrase in Thermoplasmales acquired by horizontal
transfer. An interesting case to study is that of Archaeoglobus fulgidus, where reverse gyrase, gyrase, and histone genes occur simultaneously (Klenk et al. 1997). In
this case, gyrase would have been acquired by horizontal
transfer from hyperthermophilic bacteria, but histones
have not yet been lost. This would be a good candidate to
verify if gyrase is the determinant of negative supercoiling whenever it occurs in addition to reverse gyrase. It
would be equally interesting to analyze whether the occurrence of two reverse gyrase genes affects the level of
DNA supercoiling in Aquifex aeolicus (Deckert et al.
1998) and whether its type II topoisomerase acts like a
gyrase or a Topo IV.
This hypothesis would also predict the existence of
negative levels of DNA supercoiling in the meso/
psychrophilic crenarchaea and euryarchaea detected by
rRNA sequencing directly from the environment (Barns
et al. 1996; Pace 1997; DeLong 1998). Group I psychrophiles, branching deeply into the otherwise hyperthermophilic crenarchaeota, are probably the result of a secondary adaptation to meso/psychrophily, as suggested by the
long branch length in the rRNA phylogenetic tree, likely
the result of a higher evolutionary rate (Preston et al.
1996; Barns et al. 1996). It would now be interesting to
test whether they have lost reverse gyrase and acquired
gyrase or whether they have developed an alternative
mechanism to maintain general levels of negative DNA
supercoiling.
At present, molecular ecology, which now permits the
identification of many unculturable bacteria and archaea,
in combination with comparative genomics and biochemical analysis, should help to refine the topoisomerase map in the living world. The role of these enzymes in
temperature adaptation and evolution could then begin to
be better understood.
