Time series are critical to understand microbial plankton diversity and ecology

Abstract
How diverse are marine planktonic protist communities? How much seasonality do they exhibit? For a very long time, these two old and challenging questions in the field of plankton ecology could be addressed only for large‐size protist species, based on cell counting under the microscope. The recent application of molecular techniques, notably massive marker‐gene amplicon sequencing approaches (metabarcoding), has allowed investigating with unprecedented level of resolution the small‐sized (<20 µm) planktonic eukaryotes too. An amazing diversity of these tiny organisms has been unveiled but details about their temporal dynamics remain much more elusive. In a From the Cover article in this issue of Molecular Ecology, Giner et al. (2019) introduce a new Recurrence Index (RI) to specifically look for seasonality in time‐series metabarcoding data. They inspected the temporal dynamics of all operational taxonomic units (OTUs) in a rich sequence data set of pico‐ and nanoplanktonic eukaryotes in samples collected monthly during 10 years. Although most OTUs did not show seasonality, some abundant ones did, which explains why some averaging methods can find seasonality at the less detailed level of whole planktonic communities. Not surprisingly, the very complex small‐sized eukaryotic plankton communities are composed of organisms with miscellaneous temporal dynamics.

“As there are good and bad wine and fruit years, so there are rich and barren plankton years” (Haeckel, 1891). With these eloquent words, Ernst Haeckel exemplified more than one century ago the critical role that time series must play in the study of plankton, which cannot be fully understood just on the basis of punctual observations, as they may lead to wrong conclusions if done in moments when, for whichever reason, plankton does not behave normally. Indeed, Haeckel continued by saying that “to obtain a complete and more certain survey of the temporary variations of plankton composition requires an unbroken series of observations, carried on at one and the same place at least for the space of a full year—still better for several successive years—to obtain from the yearly and monthly oscillations a general average.” This idea is behind the remarkable proliferation of marine stations across the world during the XIXth and early XXth centuries, Naples (1872), Roscoff (1872), Villefranche (1884), Scripps (1903), and Woods Hole (1930) being emblematic examples. For decades, naturalists observed marine plankton, described new species, their interactions, and the functioning of the complex plankton ecosystem. This continuous surveillance allowed discovering periodical rhythms in the abundance of particular species, leading to the elaboration of the “periodic plankton” concept (Hensen, 1890). Because of the obvious ease of observation and identification, early work largely concentrated on planktonic animals. By contrast, the study of microbial planktonic populations (<100 µm) was more challenging. However, after some decades of scrutiny, periodicity begun to be described, especially for some conspicuous species (see Figure 1 for some examples), with strong emphasis on phytoplanktonic species because of their importance as primary producers in the global C cycle (e.g., diatoms: Pratt, 1959).

Yet, knowledge remained much more partial for the difficult‐to‐observe, smallest planktonic size fractions (pico‐ and nano‐plankton, 0.2–3 and 3–20 μm, respectively), mostly composed of prokaryotes but also of a variety of tiny eukaryotes. Among them, some important algal species were described, such as the globally distributed Micromonas pusilla, though most of that diversity was considered to correspond to heterotrophic, likely bacterivorous, species. These organisms were recognized to play a significant role in the function of the plankton trophic chain by fuelling the “microbial loop” (Azam et al., 1983). However, the precise taxonomic identity of these tiny eukaryotic predators remained for the most part unknown and were collectively classified as “eukaryotic nanoflagellates” and treated as a sort of black box in ecological studies (Fenchel, 1982). Only in the early 2000s, PCR amplification and sequencing of 18S rRNA genes from environmental DNA, started to reveal the actual wealth that this black box hid, showing an extensive diversity of small‐sized eukaryotes in marine plankton (Díez, Pedrós‐Alió, & Massana, 2001; López‐García, Rodríguez‐Valera, Pedrós‐Alió, & Moreira, 2001; Moon‐van der Staay, De Wachter, & Vaulot, 2001), largely dominated by heterotrophic ‐including parasitic‐ species (Moreira & López‐García, 2002). Not surprisingly, the relatively simple morphologies of these eukaryotes concealed a vast cryptic phylogenetic diversity that was subsequently studied through larger‐scale, high‐throughput plankton metabarcoding efforts (e.g., de Vargas et al., 2015; Pernice et al., 2016). However, these efforts, despite their wide geographical scope, lack the temporal dimension indispensable to really understand plankton community composition, dynamics, biogeography, and ecology, something that only the examination of time series can achieve.

Analysis of time series of small‐sized plankton samples using molecular techniques, such as terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism and metabarcoding, had been applied for several years to study prokaryotic communities and, more rarely, eukaryotic ones. These studies revealed seasonal rhythmicity of marine and freshwater protist communities, notably by measuring pairwise Bray–Curtis similarity values between communities sampled at different time intervals (e.g., Kim et al., 2014; Simon et al., 2015). However, this averaging approach misses the fine‐grain information contained in the temporal dynamics of each individual OTU. Analyzing that information is challenging because planktonic eukaryotic community structures are complex, with hundreds or thousands of different OTUs, most of them exhibiting at first glimpse a rather sporadic temporal behavior. Giner et al. (2019) have developed a new Recurrence Index (RI) to specifically address this question on a rich data set of plankton samples collected monthly over 10 years at the Blanes Bay Microbial Observatory (Mediterranean Sea) and submitted to 18S rRNA gene metabarcoding analysis. For both eukaryotes and prokaryotes, a recurrent observation in previous marine plankton metabarcoding analyses is that diversity is most often dominated by rare OTUs occurring at very low frequencies and in single or very few samples (Pedrós‐Alió, 2006). Giner et al. (2019) corroborated this expectation and, by applying their RI index, they found that only 13% and 19% of the pico‐ and nano‐eukaryotic OTUs, respectively, showed seasonality. However, these OTUs represented a large proportion of the sequence reads (39% and 37%, respectively), indicating that they are quantitatively important members of the small‐size eukaryotic plankton community. Their high abundance probably drives the seasonality pattern at the global eukaryotic community level inferred from Bray–Curtis similarity analyses.

Several Mamiellophyceae green algae appear among the OTUs with the highest RI values. Planktonic microalgae have traditionally been considered seasonal organisms that bloom at particular dates as a response to favourable conditions (e.g., increased daylight, temperature or nutrient availability). Some heterotrophic eukaryotes are also high‐RI, in particular MALV‐III marine alveolates. For these organisms, seasonality appears to be a conserved class‐level trait since the most abundant OTUs of these groups have high RI. By contrast, nonseasonality can be common for most OTUs in other taxonomic groups, both photosynthetic (e.g., Chlorodendrophyceae) and heterotrophic (e.g., cercozoa) ones. Similarly, the proportion of seasonal and non‐seasonal OTUs varies among groups. Thus, seasonality seems to be a trait that differs among classes and even among OTUs within classes. This result stresses that eukaryotic taxa must not be regarded as homogeneous assemblages but, in most cases, as bins of species with idiosyncratic temporal dynamics, most likely owing to their specific niche adaptations.

A general assumption to explain plankton seasonality is that algal growth, driven by seasonal changes in physicochemical parameters, drives in turn the abundance of heterotrophic species (e.g., predators and parasites) that depend on them for growth. However, seasonality has also been observed for deep‐sea protists, probably much less influenced by changes in the phytoplanktonic species (Dolan, Ciobanu, Marro, & Coppola, 2017). Likewise, for most eukaryotic heterotrophs, it remains to be elucidated whether they rely directly on the co‐occurring algae or on other types of prey, notably bacteria. This open question raises an important point concerning time series: sampling frequency. Aquatic microbial communities are highly dynamic and many microorganisms can exhibit fast population size fluctuations. Thus, given the complexity of plankton communities both in terms of structure and temporal oscillation of the composing species, it seems clear that even a monthly sampling strategy most likely misses part of such rapid plankton dynamics and still does not allow to fully infer the fine temporal interplay between autotrophic and heterotrophic plankton populations. The next challenge in this field will be to apply similar techniques as Giner et al. (2019) to data sets coming from times series with higher sampling frequencies to look both into eukaryotic and prokaryotic OTU temporal dynamics.
