Gáspár Jékely provides an interesting and original rationale for the origin of the nucleus, that, in one go, explains the assembly of ribosomal complexes in the nucleus. The lynchpin of the argument is the undesirable formation of ribosome chimeras upon the transfer of mitochondrial ribosome genes to the nucleus. Upon reading the title and abstract I was a bit sceptical about the likelihood of chimeric ribosomes, but apparently these has been documented. The supporting of the hypothesis with an elegant mathematical model is appreciated, as such models often reveal holes in hypotheses. In this case this appears not to be the case. Still I have some issues with the argument that I would like the author to address:

Is there, in the literature, replacement (chimerism) in competitive situations? And connected to this question, how is the likelihood of forming chimeras in the model calculated? Is that, as I understand from the legend of the figures, the ratio of the mitochondrial RP over the host RP? How would the model behave if the likelihood of chimera's was smaller than that. These ribosomes have after all, evolved for a long time independently.

We know that most of the catalytic activity in ribosomes is in the RNA, so why would replacement lead to loss of activity?
If the transfer of mitochondrial ribosome genes to the nucleus leads, via the production of chimeras, to a reduced fitness, one would not expect it to occur.
If chimera's were an issue, one expects the evolution of ribosomal proteins that do not form chimera's: i.e. evolution at the level of the ribosome genes to prevent "cross-hybridizations". Rather than this, the model proposes an evolution of a specificity of the RanGTP for host-RP-chaperon complexes.
Do I understand from the figures correctly that there is still a lot of chimerism in the cytoplasm?
The total number of mitochondrial ribosomal proteins of (alpha-proteo)bacterial origin now totals 53 including RPS3 and RPL29 that are homologous to MRPS24 and MRPL47 (Smits, Smeitink, van den Heuvel, Huynen and Ettema, NAR 2007). I do not know which ones of these are never found on mitochondrial genomes.
The difference between orange and yellow in Figure ​Figure2B2B and ​and2C2C is quite subtle, could another color be used?