This work reports the sequencing of an almost complete bacterial draft genome (Akkermansia muciniphila) from a stool sample collected from a patient. This bacteria was likely resistant to antibiotic treatments, and one of the goals of this analysis was to identify genes potentially involved in the emergence of this medically challenging phenotype by comparing this genome to the genome of a closely related reference.
To this end, the authors used, according to their own words, an original approach to assemble metagenomic reads, producing a genome with 56 gaps left. I am not qualified to evaluate the sampling process, so I will focus my report on the other parts of this work. Although the methodology seems very sound, I would like to encourage the authors to elaborate a bit more on several aspects of their analyses.
1)Would it be possible to explain in what sense the proposed approach is original (what is new/ different from usual approaches for reads assembly)?
Also, the section, entitled Mapping (p.8), could be slightly improved in order to introduce more clearly what are the critical steps of this approach and what is their logical order of application. For example, does the order in which sequences were assembled matter? Here, the mapping started with reads from 454 shotgun data, then further information were obtained by mapping data obtained from a SOLiD sequencer. The former mapping produced a 13-fold average coverage and left 519 gaps, the latter one resulted in a 636-fold average cover and left 446 gaps. It is not very clear how the authors reconciled these two results to obtain their next mapping (the one with 392 gaps left and a 13-fold coverage). Likewise, the logic and order of steps of gaps reduction could be explained a bit more. That way, future studies may directly use the protocol proposed in this work.
2)Would it be possible to give a little bit more of an evolutionary perspective to the results that were found, i.e. the claim that Akkermansia muciniphila lost 49 genes and gained 52 others. How quick were these gains and losses? Maybe, providing the readers with a distance in terms of % identity between the 16S of the reference genome and the 16S of the newly assembled genome might give a better sense of the extent of divergence that occurred in these genomes outside this gold standard marker?
Likewise, did these gains and losses concern limited regions of the genomes, such as genomic islands, or were they widespread? Is there any clue of the mechanisms involved in the genes gains?
Minor points: The abstract indicates that 56 gaps are left in the draft genome, but Table 2 indicates 58 gaps, please reconcile these numbers.
p.7. The authors correctly explain that if the reference genome contains additional or highly divergent genes with respect to the environmental genome that they aimed at reconstructing, their protocol would result in gaps in this latter draft genome. Conversely, it might also be useful to discuss what would happen, in terms of assembly, if the draft genome contains additional or highly divergent genes with respect to the reference genome. In particular, is not there a risk to lose some of the original gene content of Akkermansia muciniphila? For example, could lost genes be fast evolving genes?
p.8. typo? They sequences?
Figure 1: the authors used CLC for the mapping, did they try other assemblers (and a different range of parameters) to estimate whether the number of gaps could be further reduced? In particular, in a second step of the analysis, could not it help to relax the criterion of % similarity (>90%) to possibly aggregate more divergent genes into the contigs/genome?
Table ​Table11 typo:? best his? instead of? best hits?.
Quality of written English: Acceptable.