Peter Gogarten and his team play a major role in the debate on the Tree of Life (TOL). Therefore, their contribution to this special issue on how to go beyond the TOL is of unquestionable importance. They propose the reconstruction of a "rooted net of life" (rNOL) as a new reasonable goal for phylogenomics. In many respect, this notion seems sound: it is likely a research program that many phylogenomicists will be tempted to embrace. In particular, I entirely agree that organisms consist of many discrete evolutionary units, with multiple histories, a fact that is lost with the TOL, and therefore the TOL is not sufficient to capture true complexity of the evolution of life. It is also important to reckon that a universal evolutionary schema must include reticulations, not merely as decoration but as an intrinsic feature.
Two major comments however. First, the rNOL is not the only possible research path for evolutionists "beyond the TOL". Second, if embraced, important conceptual clarifications are still required to interpret the rNOL, because it cannot be done merely with the concepts of the TOL. A well understood rNOL is not just a TOL plus some fancy lateral edges, it is not quite "phylogenetic business almost as usual".
Major comments
1. The rNOL is not the TOL
This claim is crucial and should be made more significant, because it has practical and conceptual implications. The move from a TOL to a rNOL is more than just an extension of the TOL, through the addition of lateral branches to this tree. The rNOL research program really goes beyond the research program associated with the TOL. The former nodes and edges are not directly comparable to the nodes and edges represented in the TOL. Therefore the nodes and edges of the rNOL and of the TOL cannot really be interpreted alike. It would be misleading, therefore, and for the sake of convenience - a rhetorical trick - to describe the rNOL with the words and notions designed to analyze the TOL. Tree-thinking should not be directly imported en bloc into rNOL-thinking, as if not much was changing when the rNOL replaces the TOL to represent evolution. If the interest of evolutionists shifts from the TOL to the rNOL, some new concepts are needed to interpret the rNOL. This fundamental aspect of the transition from a TOL to a rNOL should be made much more explicit in this MS. I would like to suggest that the authors devote a short but entirely novel section to the issue of rNOL-thinking, that shows that going from the TOL to the rNOL requires significant (and not just minor) conceptual adjustments.
Reviewer 2 continued: For example, the authors propose that each organism in a rNOL is represented by a single node and a single edge, unless the organism changes. For them a node is a meeting place for a possible genetic melting pot: the organism lies where various units join in a collective obligate mutualism. This notion of an organism is interesting, but is it the organismal notion associated with the TOL? I would say "no".
Reviewer 2 continued: Why does it matter? Because then the vertical backbone of the rNOL does not track organismal evolution. It tracks the evolution of the least mobile units of this collective obligate mutualism, or, if one wishes, it captures the "(less mobile) background organism".
Reviewer 2 continued: However, with such a definition, the organism itself changes each time a new genetic unit (i.e. one or several genes, or a symbiont) comes in or goes out of the collective obligate mutualism. Therefore, in the rNOL every lateral connection in addition to the vertical splits gives rise to a new organism. New names are needed to describe these nodes, which do not exist on a tree. This in turn has an important consequence for another default notion of tree-thinking: the notion of (phylogenetic) species. Phylogeneticists cannot track species as easily on a rNOL as they were hoping to do on a TOL. What type of "chunk of the rNOL" corresponds to a species cannot probably be decided without considering what biological features the in-edges and out-edges provide or remove from the "background organism". In other words, not every edge (and not all sets of nodes/not every node) creates a new species. How is it decided what edge does and what edge does not define a new species? We need names to distinguish these edges. (And this is without mentioning the fact that sometimes "species" of interest lie in the very mesh of the lateral edges, precisely when gene exchanges are the defining criteria of an evolutionary unit one wishes to call a species rather than organisms with a conserved vertical core). As the rNOL would be a real opportunity to acknowledge the multiple processes at play in evolution, this clarifying goal is also part of this new research program. It likely requires creating suitable concepts, rather than importing "good old notions" that worked (to some extent) soley for the vertical process (e.g. the tree of cell division is not telling us where a species starts or ends, etc.). Advocates of the rNOL should therefore refrain from calling the vertical part of the rNOL the "species tree" or the "organismal tree": species/organisms may not be defined by vertical processes to start with. There are many reasons to give a more accurate name to that likely important vertical backbone, while not conflating it with a "species tree". I encourage the authors to rephrase their MS accordingly, where necessary, and to replace "species tree" or "organismal tree" or "TOL" by "vertical backbone" or by "tree of the least frequently transferred units" when that is what they mean. Discriminating a vertical backbone in the net of life matters, and calling it the TOL may limit the deeper meaning of the rNOL enterprise. (Interested readers can also refer to [96]).
Reviewer 2 continued: 2. The rNOL presented here is a rNOC, but is the rNOC inclusive enough to describe evolution?
As it is described in the MS, the rNOL seems first concerned with the evolution of cells and that of cellular genomes. Where are the plasmids and the viruses in the rNOL? Is their evolution also modeled by it, and where? Or, unfortunately their evolution is not really represented, meaning that the rNOL has room only for cellular genomes and not all evolving elements with DNA genomes? It is unclear how the many plasmidic and viral genomes (some of which are without homologues to cellular genomes and to other plasmids and viruses), or even how ORFan genes, or all the sequences too divergent to be aligned and put in a tree, or the many environmental genes, could fit in a single rNOL. Where do they fit? The reference scaffold of the rNOL, based on ribosomal RNAs and proteins, seems largely to act as the reference phylogeny of ribocells [97].
Reviewer 2 continued: As such, the rNOL describes a larger part of the history of life than the TOC (tree of cells), yet it does not really describe the "full history of life". That's why it is important to acknowledge that going beyond the TOL could be achieved by using additional/alternative paths than the rNOL.
Reviewer 2 continued: Other research paths are also possible beyond the TOL.
This is not a major criticism, simply an observation: the evolutionary literature about what evolutionists could do if the TOL were no longer their default option is a bit more heterogeneous than suggested in this MS. Some more literature could have been cited at places to put the rNOL solution retained by the authors in a larger scientific perspective. I can think of at least two very different options that were not discussed here, and I would like to encourage the authors to quote them somewhere in the slightly revised version of their MS:
a) Pattern pluralism [58] that questions whether we need to replace a unique representation by another unique representation. See also [98] that explicitly proposes to model different evolutionary outcomes with different evolutionary patterns (one tree, one rNOL, disconnected genome networks based on shared sequences, etc.). About these latter genome networks, see all the refs in [99], and the research program suggested in [100].
b) Analyses of phylogenetic forests [28,86-88]. Unrooted gene trees can be analyzed through various methods of tree-cutting, the most famous so far being the methods of quartet decomposition that can inform us about evolution without necessarily providing a grand rooted unified evolutionary scheme, or requiring the reduction to a single graph (tree-like or web-like).
I feel it is important to acknowledge that how to go beyond the TOL is itself debated.
Reviewer 2 continued:
Minor comments
The authors indicate that "many, if not most of [the genes] will be congruent across most of the tree". I do not think we know that (most of the time this is not tested but assumed), and for the datasets that I tested I did not observe this kind of agreement. Rather most of the prokaryotic/viral/plasmidic genes are surprisingly incongruent. We will hopefully have some data published on that question in future works (Leigh et al., in prep.), but the thousands upon thousands of microbial trees I had the opportunity to view are in my opinion more messy than suggested here. See also [103] for multiple phylogenetic histories in E. coli strains.
Reviewer 2 continued: The sentence "it is clear that [. . . ] a reference tree representing a history of predominantly vertical descent is an essential scaffold for any such holistic effort" is certainly correct, but maybe not as dramatically as evolutionists have long thought. First, such a unique reference tree cannot be produced for all evolving forms. Viruses and plasmids from isolated genetic worlds (see [99]) can never branch in a single vertical tree. More than one vertical tree would be required to describe their history. If the number of viruses without direct connection to the cellular gene pool increases, this genetic disconnection will increasingly become a problem. Second, the "organizing importance" of the historical tree also largely depends on the (relative) lack of information regarding other possible organizing metadata: had we more knowledge on DNA vehicles and organismal lifestyles for instance, we might decide that lifestyle is an essential scaffold for an holistic effort. Maybe it would be worth encouraging, along with the reconstruction of a rNOL, the development of additional organizing scaffolds for microbial evolution rather than to give this major role only to the history of vertical descent. Yes, history matters (we would not be evolutionists otherwise), but to what extent it is of "organizing importance" is largely an empirical question : what proportion of the genetic characters are well explained based on the vertical tree vs what proportion are well explained (although in different terms) using another interpretative framework [88]? In lineages with open pangenomes, lifestyle may matter more than vertical descent, at least at some scale of the analysis. Open lineages [104] will also be a problem.
What the "biological meaning" is of the central (vertical) trend is a really good question, and should be treated first like that: as a question, even though it may be tempting to assume that the vertical trend has good explanatory power. Many evolutionists hope it does, but we do not really know that. In the reconstruction of the rNOL, it should be carefully tested to what extent the gene histories are (largely) disconnected from the vertical history. In other words, maybe the authors could add some thoughts to the following issue: Should the methodological approach to the rNOL be quite the same than the methodological approach to the TOL, or would not be additional and better congruence tests required to justify the vertical backbone? Can the goal of obtaining a rNOL be a sufficient justification for combining sequences for improved resolution (a classical approach well described in the authors' text) without testing the congruence of these sequences? Should the assumption that there is a real meaningful vertical history recorded in the genes used to build the background be tested? It seems that rNOL builders should not rely on a priori assumptions about the rate of HGT of genes, and that some tests are critical. The authors have convincingly argued that, depending on the expected rate of HGT, supermatrices or supertrees should be preferred: what to do when we do not know the amount of HGT in our taxa, over time ? The transition from TOL to rNOL is largely determined by the fact that HGT may be major in some genomes and lineages, not the TOL. Thus, maybe a little section entitled 'Practical consequences of the TOL to rNOL transition" could discuss this aspect in a few sentences? If one wants to put his/her hopes in algorithmic development to improve tree reconstruction models, improved models should account for lineages with different rates of HGT (as the developments discussed in "Accounting for heterogeneous evolutionary processes" clearly indicate).
Reviewer 2 continued: "118 species": what species? Please be precise: prokaryotes, eukaryotes?
Reviewer 2 continued: The authors suggest that rooting the ribosomal tree of life should help by polarizing the complex reticulations of the many gene trees mapped onto it. This seems optimistic: individual gene phylogenies can be so messy (due to duplication, losses, and recombinational lateral gene transfer in addition to speciation) that even knowing how to root the ribosomal tree may not be that decisive for the polarization of these gene trees. What can be done when there are multiple copies of the same species? And why should we root patchy gene trees, for instance trees with three bacteria and one archaeon, between archaea and bacteria? Such small trees are typical outcomes of lateral gene transfers: rooting them according to the ribosomal tree of life would hide these transfers by making us believe that patchy gene families are ancestral gene families lost everywhere but in these particular lineages.
Reviewer 2 continued: "The majority of molecular phylogenies rooted using ancient gene duplications . . .": Please remind the readers how many phylogenies did that amount to?
Reviewer 2 continued: There are many more examples of bacterial HGT to eukaryotes (in algae, rotifers, cnidarian), . . .
Reviewer 2 continued: "more complex than a single tree-like narrative": I agree entirely, and you could have quoted [58] on about that topic (and other things)
Reviewer 2 continued: "if too many conflicts are present in the datasets or the phylogenetic signal is too weak [. . . ] these artifacts". Please add a few references after this sentence - there are many
Reviewer 2 continued: I understand and appreciate why the authors prefer to use the ribosomal genes over an average tree to build the vertical backbone, yet as a pluralistic thinker I would be happier if several rNOLs were reconstructed based on different vertical backbones (i.e. for different gene selections), so users could estimate how important the choice of the vertical backbone may be (or finally may not be) for future evolutionary conclusions.