This paper, in many respects well-balanced, proposes a strategy to reconstruct a tree of cells, and discusses questions regarding the TOL in ways, that in my opinion, should be significantly improved to be convincing.

The authors begin by acknowledging that genetic evolution is largely reticulated in prokaryotes, but that genetic and cellular evolution should be distinguished, since, importantly, cellular evolution could be accurately described by a tree.

They argue that the tree of cells could be reconstructed by (i) considering the distribution of functions (e.g. the repertoires of functions present in genomes) rather than the repertoires of genes; and by (ii) giving a greater weight to genes that are abundantly expressed in cells (rather than giving similar weigth to all genes) to define the branching pattern of cellular evolution. Genes with a greater abundance, they propose, would be less easy to transfer. In that regard, they introduce a novel (and possibly quite sound) 'complexity hypothesis' based on abundance. In the complexity hypothesis, genes with more interactions are expected to be less transferred, in the 'abundant hypothesis', genes with the most abundant expression are expected to be less transferred.

Whether the evolution of functions is tree-like as the authors repeatedly claim could be tested by reconstructing a phylogenetic network based on the functional content of genomes. The authors should do it in a revised version of the MS and add that analysis and a figure to their paper. This test of the tree-like evolution of functions would improve the paper, since in some parts of their manuscript, the authors mention the problematic possibility that even functions evolution could be to some extent affected by HGT (e.g. p.19). In particular, the extent to which such repertoires of functions could be convergent to adapt to some environments (i.e. animal guts, or hypersaline environments) is probably partly an open question, that could complicate the interpretation of the branching pattern in such trees. Likewise, the authors mention that indels (another type of slowly evolving characters, in their view less affected by HGT) appear on the same points on a tree. It would be tempting as well to see how a phylogenetic network of these data on indels look (e.g. how tree-like the distribution of indels is), and how it matches with the tree of functions.

Gene abundance, especially in extinct cells, may be quite difficult to quantify. The data are currently limited to decide which genes are abundant and which ones are not. Nonetheless, this limitation could be a chance, since it should be possible to test whether these abundant genes evolve vertically or not, by aligning these genes (and corresponding controls) and by searching possible traces of recombination in them, or evidence of inconsistent or odd branchings in their trees. Knowing whether these genes appear to recombine/transfer in proportions comparable with that of non abundant (control) genes would help evaluating the authors' claim that abundantly expressed genes are less affected by LGT. Such an analysis should also be added to a revised version of this paper. Indeed if molecular changes accumulate in these sequences largely due to non vertical processes, at some evolutionary depth, the proposition made by the authors that such genes would better describe vertical evolution than other markers (and thus should be preferred in case of conflict between markers) would simply be wrong.
The authors' conclusions that the tree of functions (should it be consistent with the data, once reconstructed) is a good proxy of the tree of cells, itself a perfect match of the Tree of Life, is very arguable. The tree of functions, the tree of cells and the Tree of Life can hardly be one same thing. They can hardly be considered isomorphic for a simple reason: they do not have the same explanatory powers, nor the same explanatory scopes. Evolution in general is much more than the evolution of cells, or the evolution of functions (even if these two aspects are very important to understand evolution). The problem is that biological diversity resulting from evolution by far exceeds these two aspects: many evolutionary units (recombined genes, operons, transferred genes, mosaic genomes, consortia, communities, 'acellular' and 'intercellular evolution' mediated by mobile elements such as phages and plasmids) cannot be exactly mapped onto a tree of functions or onto a tree of cells. The evolutionary fates of these objects are partly (and sometimes largely or totally) uncoupled with the ones described by the tree of functions or by the tree of cells. The tree of functions - if it can be reconstructed- would certainly be informative about the evolution of functions; the tree of cells divisions - if it can be reconstructed- will be informative about a part of cellular evolution. However such a tree of cell divisions won't inform us about most of what cannot be considered as mere details in evolution: the lifestyle, adaptation, processes creating and sustaining the genetic diversity, the selection pressures at play and the evolution of species (that is how remarkable groups of organisms emerged (or failed to emerge) from the interplay of evolutionary processes).
This limited explanatory power of such a tree is even clearly demonstrated in this manuscript: the 'cellular core' of four spirochetes is already uninformative about the Spirochetes lifestyles. Using these 'abundant genes' would not allow explaining much of the spirochetes biology, and thus of these species origin (how some become obligate parasites for instance). The duality between the tree of cells and the network of genes, well acknowledged by the authors, seems irreducible, because real and relevant to our understanding of evolution. In other words, while the authors rigthly argue that the genome and the cell should not be confused with one another, they seem to be tempted to approximate the entire biology and the entire evolution by the history of cell divisions. This confusion too should be discouraged.
It would certainly be interesting to polarize in time many evolutionary scenarios, but it does not follow that, based on the history of some genes with a slower dynamic and based on some 'frozen' features, we will be able to infer the independent histories of the other genes and of the other organismal properties evolving with a distinct (faster) pace. In that respect, knowing the tree of cell division might not help much in understanding precise gene histories (for instance). A tree of cells will have some useful explanatory power but not as much as a dreamt TOL.
The authors' choice to keep using the phrase 'tree of life' when referring to the pattern of common descent even if it is more of a web, because this would somehow annoy creationists, is in my opinion not a good idea. I do not think creationists should dictate us any of our scientific agenda, or influence our wording, as they have no scientific competence to evaluate evolutionary studies. When phenomena are not tree-like, we should not call them a tree. When they are tree-like and are supported by several lines of independent evidence, we should call them the 'most corroborated evolutionary tree' or the 'best evolutionary tree' but not the tree of life, because maybe features did not evolve in a tree like fashion, and thus cannot be reduced to that scheme to be fully understood.
There is then a cost to do as if the Tree of Life existed (but not testing this scientific hypothesis): it reifies parts of the tree, like the nodes and the branches. Lawrence and Rechtless have masterfully shown that nodes, when conceived as points of speciations, are not 'real'. When prokaryotic species do not evolve by a series of dichotomies, it is a delusion to impose a dichotomy to describe a speciation.
The root poses a comparable issue. The authors keep referring to LUCA, as if there were one one last universal common ancestor of all life that was a cell. The literature on early life is, to say the least, divided about this notion. Invoking LUCA to prove that there is a tree, and the tree to prove that there is a LUCA, without any principled way (or any test) to refute that there is a LUCA or that there is a tree is unfortunately a circular argument. That all cells share a given gene/function does not mean that all cells evolved vertically. If LUCA ever existed (which I doubt, and most importantly which in my view could explain more than a part of early evolution), how big was its pangenome? What kind of mobile elements drove its evolution? We need to make sure that a prioris about the tree and about LUCA being real do not already bias our conclusions, if these a prioris cannot be tested. Otherwise, we might reinforce our habits of tree-thinkers, but not necessarily our knowledge of evolution per se.
In that regards, I have a few detailed suggestions where some simplifications could maybe be corrected in the text.
p.3: The authors wrote: If every daughter cell's membrane kept track of who its parent was, reconstructing evolution would be a trivial task. I feel that this is a bit misleading, it would inform us on a part of evolution: If every daughter cell's membrane kept track of who its parent was, reconstructing evolution of cell divisions would be a trivial task. It would not tell us anything on how species taxa, and genes, and phages, and communities, etc. evolved.
p.3: It is very arguable that even genomic evolution makes little sense without the light of cellular evolution. There is certainly lots of knowledge to be gained from metagenomic analyses, from the study of mobile elements, from the study of gene evolution, lots of patterns and processes to explain, even without the light of cellular evolution. This is not to say that we would not benefit from that particular light. But this light will mostly make a 'genealogical' sense on evolution, and evolution is more than genealogy.
p.4: The TOL does not become even more important under a pluralistic approach, quite the opposite: it is regionalized under a pluralistic approach, as no single model can explain everything about evolution under that perspective. Finding the tree of cells for instance remains an important and ambitious goal, but not the alpha and omega of evolutionary research. The importance of the TOL thus decreases while the importance of additional interesting evolutionary questions increases.
p.5. It seems to me that proteins abundancy and core cellular features might be a basal make-up of cellular lineages on which further adaptations are adjusted. If there is some ratchet, abundant proteins can not be easily gotten rid of, but that does not mean that most of the evolutionary dynamic concerns these proteins and their coding genes.
p.5. Comparing how many of the same functions two cells are doing at the same time is a good measure of similarity, but is it a good proxy of the genealogy ? This depends on the amount of convergence and selective pressures on functions induced by the environment. Is not it possible that bacteria of the gut microbiomes (or of a salty environment) will perform the same functions at the same time even if they are not directly related ?
p. 6. For a detailed argument that a TOL is not as meaningful as claimed in [13], when there is a large incongruence between individual gene trees, see Bapteste et al. Biol Direct. 2009 Sep 29;4:34. Prokaryotic evolution and the tree of life are two different things.
p.11: I absolutely disagree with the following statement: Trees have many shortcomings for representing prokaryotic evolution, but any data structure that lacks temporality is even worse. Reconstructing a wrong tree (imposing an irrelevant structure to the data because of our a prioris) is the worst thing one can do. We can learn a lot from unrooted gene trees, on which by definition there is no temporality.
p. 18 and p. 19: When commenting on dualities, the text becomes pretty metaphysical in places. I do not see why 'the' light must be 'the TOL': a light can be a tree of cells, another light a tree of functions, and so on. Why do you need only one light to explore the darkness of evolution anyway, while so many processes are occuring, creating a diversity of phenomena that calls for more than one explanation ?
A thinking about evolution in terms of yin and yang is possibly not entailed by the quote on (I believe) Darwin's malthusianism. I doubt that historians of sciences and/or philosophers of sciences would be convinced that this is a proper use of that particular quote. I do not think it is needed in the paper.
p.18: I disagree with this sentence: A web of life may be more factual than a single TOL, but we argue it is a less accurate depiction of life's history.. The authors possibly have in mind a fairly simple web of shared genes. But even these graphs can be further studied to gain knowledge on history. Dagan and Martin for instance have shown how such networks can be exploited to learn about life's history. And what about phylogenetic networks for taxa with a limited amount of HGT: are they worse than a tree to describe life's history? To me this kind of claim is counterproductive, as it fails to acknowledge that it might just be time to change our habits and our thinking about how evolution should be described.
I also would like to make some further precisions:
p.2. The conclusion of Doolittle and Bapteste is not so much that the inability to build the tree is the problem, rather it is forcing the data into a tree that needs to be questionned, and in a pluralistic framework, avoided, since this model does not allow a precise description of the evolutionary processes.
p.17: The authors write that it is not clear what level of genome conservation between strains of prokaryotes would be satisfying enough to consider them evolving in a tree-like manner. It is true that two strains of the same species may have relatively few genes in common, but we have argued above this is probably an exaggeration of functional distance. Even if the second sentence might be correct, its association with the first one suggest that the authors tend to overlook the importance of recombination in prokaryotic genomes, a major process that is not tree-like. This non-tree like phenomenon can in part be masked by zooming out at a higher taxonomical level, still the real processes responsible for evolution are not tree-like. In that respect, a tree of cells or a tree of functions will fall short in explaining major evolutionary processes at play on genomes.
p.17: Just like genomes simply are not enough to study genomics, cells (or functions) are not enough to study evolution: you need to include phages, plasmids, etc.
p.19: The duality that the authors propose between HGT that shape evolution and HGT that confound our tree building algorithms seems a distinction between good and bad HGTs. This distinction (if it can be achieved, how ?) could help them building an evolutionary tree, but it would not make the processes of evolution and prokaryotic genetic evolution more tree-like in nature. Both good and bad HGTs are non strictly vertical processes.
Overall, in many places of the MS the authors could advantageously replace TOL by Tree of Cells, which would address (simply) most of my concerns.
To sum up, I feel that the current title of the manuscript is misleading, unnecessarily dramatic, and should be modified.
What this MS proposes is how a tree of cellular functions, equated with the tree of cells, could possibly be reconstructed by taking into account additional (novel) sources of data (such as the functional repertoire of genomes and the abundance of expressed genes in the cells) rather than by focusing on the mere gene content of genomes, and by giving comparable weights to the phylogenetic signal(s) of each individual gene.
The Tree of Life and the tree of cells are however two different things: in particular they do not offer similar explanations of evolution. The tree of cells is by definition more limited in its scope than the legendary Tree of Life. It is then important to stress that the tree that could be saved if the author's proposition hold is (and that is already quite good) either the tree of functions or the tree of cells.
The title also suggests that evolutionary biologists would be lost without this one tree. I think this claim is unduly pessimistic, and stems from our acquired habits to explain evolution with a tree model. Evolutionary biologists won't be lost without the tree of life: they will be challenged. They will need to reconsider their practices, their goals, and their explanatory toolkits to make sense of an evolution that is not just tree-like.
There are lots of fascinating researches to be done to learn about the evolutionary processes and mechanisms, that do not require the inference of a unique tree of life, i.e. to harvest the phylogenetic forest of unrooted trees (see Lapointe et al. Trends in Micro, in press), or to exploit genome networks (see Dagan and Martin's works; Fani, Fondi et al.'s works, Lima-Mendez, Leplae et al.'s or Halary et al.'s works). Our explanations will be different, but evolutionary biologists won't be out of job or hopeless. Such a possibility could/should have been explored more by the authors, as they reckon that it is not clear what our expectation of prokaryote should be. Precisely, clarifying this expectation, with the least possible a prioris, is an exciting prospect for evolutionary science.
This is why I finally beg all authors who might be tempted to send me some more papers to review on themes such as 'rescuing the TOL' or 'saving the TOL' in a near future not to: I have definitely said all I had to say on that issue for a little while, and it is time for me to move on more exciting research topics ྶ.
Additional specific comments
Further questions
p.8: Do large pangenomes have larger repertoires of functions ? If so, won't that affect the reconstruction of a tree of functions ?
p. 9: Why should we assume that COGs that are the most widely distributed in extant taxa are the most ancient ones? Why can not they be highly transferred ?
p. 19: The fact that a large chunk of universal cellular function has remained conserved and its sequence behaves in a mostly tree-like manner after billions of years earns it the title of TOL in our opinion. How is this a fact ? How has this been tested ?
Unclear sentences
p.1. 'results': What do you mean by proper selective context ?
p.2. Why should the woods be 'woods of neutral evolution' ?
p.5. What do you mean by: The downside of abundance is it is dynamic, while genomes are static. ? What time-line/evolutionary scale do you have in mind ? At the TOL level, genomes are very dynamic.
p. 12: This entire section: The disagreement between these phylogenies is not in terms of how to define the major taxa but rather in the proper way to polarize the data, especially the indels (insertion deletions) which we have discussed [34]. However, the distribution of these traits themselves implies specific taxa evolved before another, regardless of the direction of each polarization. For example, there is a large insert in HSP70 (heat shock protein 70) that is present across the Gram-negative bacteria, but absent in the Gram-positives. One form of the protein must have predated the other. There is no reason to assume all the informative indels were fixed early in evolution, and one would be very hard pressed to draw a detailed scenario of transfers that explains their distribution better than a more timeline like structure. is unclear, and should be somehow rewritten. If this is a philosophical point (rather than an empirical comment on the data distribution), I would say that the best explanations are not necessarily the ones that match a tree, these latter are only the simplest explanations. When irrelevant, they do not help much.
p.13: Abundance data may make it possible to quantify what Simpson coined "quantum evolution" when referring to the metazoan fossil record [35] on a molecular level in prokaryotes. This sentence needs to be developped or better explained (as it is I do not recognize Simpson's theory - that gives a main role to the environmental selection in quantum evolution- if I recall correctly, as a particularly valid analogy here).
p. 16: This highly finctional sentence makes no sense whatsoever to me: We think the TOL crisis would be worse if it was the "tree of 99%", as it would be quite difficult to explain the phenotypic differences between humans and E. coli. It is remarkable any genes are conserved since LUCA, and therefore the TOL still rings true to us.
Typos
p. 2: Bapteste is spelled strangely.
p.17: But since expression is highly correlated without evolutionary rates [38] Do you mean 'with' not without, don't you ?
p.19, first line: a word is missing before 'has'.