Eugene V. Koonin's contributions to the field of evolutionary biology have been numerous although quite different in nature. This author (and his team) have provided rigorous scientific explanations for biological phenomena as well as contributed more prospective works, which point out important issues rather than propose robust answers. Such prospective works are important because they can indicate future directions for biological research. I consider the present manuscript to be of this second kind and to be meant to provide us with a hint of deeper evolution analyses still to come.

That is to say the reader should not consider the present manuscript as the last word on the question of the temporal order of evolution of the DNA replication systems, but as a good opportunity to think about it again. There could be and likely will be more to be said on this issue. If he wanted, and I think he could (thus maybe should), Eugene Koonin himself could contribute further and more decisive analyses on this topic in a slightly revised version of this manuscript.

Before I suggest some of the additional studies that could help test and maybe strengthen E. Koonin's current claim, I would like to stress an interesting perspective this paper could contribute to put forward. I take it to be the general and quite elegant idea, that "comparisons of viral genomes with the genomes of cellular life forms might provide windows into the deep past of life's evolution". This mine of genetic information is indeed not systematically explored in evolutionary analyses of cellular life forms, although, because it broadens the portion of the metagenome investigated, it would be certainly capable of highlighting the dynamics of cellular genome evolution. However, presenting a strong case for the use of the phylogenetic information stored in the DNA of viral communities remains challenging. In this regard, I am still unconvinced by the robustness of the claim of the present manuscript, although the temporal order of evolution of DNA replication systems presented here might be absolutely correct.

In this paper, Koonin presents a striking observation regarding the distribution of polymerases in viruses: the archaeal type (polB) is almost ubiquitous, the bacterial type (polC) is very rare. He thus legitimately looks for an explanation of this fact.

Several possibilities could a priori be considered:

(i) PolB is more broadly distributed because its fitness is better than polC fitness, and it invades viral genomes more efficiently: polB then replaces polC. One could not exclude that polB is a succesfull newcomer.

(ii) PolC is a newcomer in viral genomes, which was never able to successfully replace the efficient polB because polB is ancient and sucessful.

(iii) The present distribution does not really tell us much about which of these two polymerases appeared first, because we lack essential knowledge regarding the dynamic and mode of inheritance of polymerases within viral genomes. PolB and polC, in that regard, might well be equally ancient (and their present, highly unbalanced distribution could reflect the stochastic result of a very ancient competition between these two forms in the smallest first LUCAn population). Agnosticism is a scienfitic answer too.

In my view, a phylogeny of the viral polB to decide between these three options is currently lacking. Phylogenetic analysis of polB could test the presence of signs of high mobility and a tendency to spread across viral genomes. I would encourage Eugene Koonin to build such a phylogenetic tree of viral polB and to comment on it in a revised version of the manuscript.
Furthermore, it would be interesting to test the congruence between the phylogeny of this marker and those of the other components of the replication systems. Congruence within the latter trees but disagreement with the former would suggest that polB has a tendency to be highly mobile, and capable of replacing native polymerases.
If this is not the case, I would be more inclined to accept Koonin's claim that maybe the poor distribution of polC reflects the relative recency of this polymerase (although I suspect the causes for such an extreme distribution could easily involve more than old historical causation alone). So far, I feel that the best argument presented in this manuscript in favor of polB ancestrality is not recorded in viruses DNA but rather in PolB structure. According to the author, PolB structure would be compatible with the RNA world hypothesis (and evolved from ancestral RdRp replicatives enzymes), while PolC structure would not be so, hence would be a secondary aquisition. I have no problem with this argument, except that then Eugene Koonin's point about the important role to be played by viral genomes content in ancient evolutionary analyses appear less important that I had hoped.
The manuscript could also contain a more in depth biochemical presentation of PolB and PolC (structures, length, stability properties, etc.), which would help in the discussion of which polymerases has a higher chance of being carried/recruited by viral mosaic genomes, because some slight physico-chemical differences could not explain the predominance of one marker versus the other.

Finally, in all naivety, I am curious to know if some viral genomes investigated by Eugene Koonin happened to lack any of the currently known polymerases. If yes, does that mean that there are alternate replication systems, which could put the problem considered here in a different perspective by putting more attention on intermediary stages in the evolution of replication system, where neither polB nor polC were the decisive elements: after all in the egg-or-chicken-first controversy, the answer is a third term...Is it conceivable that there are even more polymerases (or proteins playing their role in an older replication system) to be discovered?
Minor questions:

- Could you please comment on the likely "age" of/relationships between the 8 phages genomes with a polC homologue? Does it look like polC was gained independently multiple times?
- All along the manuscript and in your figures, you refer to primitive life forms as bacteria or archaea. Do you really mean this? It would seem more correct to me to talk about cenancestor of bacteria/archaea (or populations of cenancestors of bacteria/archaea). To me bacteria is a label associated with extant lineages, but it is unclear wether we could identify such a bacteria in the past. When you use this term, do you have in mind a series of characters (bacterial synapomorphies) that made them a bona fide bacteria back then or are these bacteria and archaea of the past not that similar to our present ones (and maybe would deserve another name then)?