The article provides a rather detailed analysis of evolutionary divergence and conservation of certain structure-functional features within a very interesting and uniquely ubiquitous gamma glutamyl transpeptidase enzyme family. Despite the depth of the analysis, eloquent use of available tools and well-organized presentation of the main findings, the actual impact of the manuscript appears questionable. Even the selection of 47 representative species (given thousands available genomes) is not clearly justified, and, to make things worse, may introduce some biases at the level of conclusions. E.g., the most striking example of a potential bias is the statement (page 5) that “The“Bact1” clade, exclusively composed of bacterial organisms known to be pathogenic for human…” A closer look at the list shows that the entire branch is simply composed of Proteobacteria, and all selected representatives just happen to be related to known pathogens (while myriads of nonpathogenic Proteobacteria were simply not included in the analysis!). Moreover, a number of potentially interesting and important aspects are just mentioned in passing while many other rather technical and mundane observations are described in detail. For example “valuable functional or physiochemical differences” or “biotechnological and biomedical applications” of GGT enzymes are mentioned several times, but no details and no clear functional associations with the observed structural variations (emerging from this analysis) are conveyed. As a result, the overall impression from this paper is that the authors laid out a nice framework for the actual predictive analysis (to be followed by experimental testing) but stopped short of any real breakthroughs in structure-functional or mechanistic understanding of the family or its particular representatives. Thus, while they duly emphasize the utility of comparative analysis for supporting the development of specific inhibitors, the paper hardly provides any tangible guidelines for such development (beyond pointing to clade-specific variations in the vicinity of universally conserved residues). To make it simple, the current version of a paper comes thru as an introduction or a setup for a story, but THE STORY itself remains untold. This overall impression holds despite a few interesting observations on evolution (e.g. on large similarity between Bact1 and Euk branches as compared to many other Bacteria) or patterns of sequence conservation/ variation as they do not seem to lead to a new level of understanding. Moreover, all methodology used in the paper is rather established, and it is unlikely that yet another illustration of its utility on the example of a particular family (no matter how important) would be of sufficiently broad interest.

The article provides a detailed analysis of evolutionary divergence and conservation of structure-functional features within a very interesting and uniquely ubiquitous gamma glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) enzyme family. For this analysis, authors have selected a rather limited subset of GGT family to enable the analysis of variations within relatively compact phylogenetic groups with functionally and/or structurally characterized representatives. As a result, they built a framework for elucidation of evolutionary relationships and potentially important structure-functional variations within this family, a subject of further computational and experimental analysis. Thus, mapping of clade-specific variations in the vicinity of universally conserved residues suggests the principal possibility and provides a support for development of specific inhibitors. Among interesting evolutionary observations is a larger sequence similarity of a particular Bacterial branch of GGT family with the Eukaryotic branch as compared to its similarity with other Bacterial branches.