The manuscript by D. Shalaeva et al. “Modeling of interaction between cytochrome c and Apaf-1: bifurcated salt bridges underlying apoptosome assembly” is addressing an intriguing and fundamentally important problem. How the two seemingly unrelated proteins with distinct evolutionary history, molecular functions and compartmentalization recognize each other and form a unique molecular machine of cellular self-distraction? The importance of this recognition and assembly is quite obvious considering devastating potential consequences of imprecision, the untimely cell death or even more dangerous immortality (as in malignant transformation). Remarkably, while numerous experimental studies in this subject area provided rich and diverse data, none of them proposed a sufficiently detailed mechanistic model. In addition to apparent experimental difficulties, this is also due to the general tendency of such (or any other) studies to focus on one particular technology, which often falls short of providing sufficient resolution to effectively address such a complex task. An integrative approach combining dynamic structural modeling with advanced evolutionary analysis allowed the authors of this study to produce plausible and potentially testable hypotheses about atomic-level interactions, a unique electrostatic bar-code driving apoptosome assembly. The choice of both principal technological components of this analysis is perfectly justified by the dynamic nature of the two underlying (albeit very distinct) processes, heterooligomerization of the apoptosome components and their co-evolution. While, the latter aspect is fascinating by itself, the applied co-evolutionary trajectory approach was also particularly instrumental in elucidating the interacting amino acid residues. This was especially helpful for supporting one of the key hypotheses about rather unusual (but not unprecedented) dual electrostatic interactions between lysine residues emerging in eukaryotic cytochromes with adjacent pairs of dicarboxylic amino acid residues in Apaf-1, as well as about their special role in the apoptosome assembly process. Overall, this elegant study provides us with a remarkable example of insightful structural bioinformatic analysis in the postgenomic era. Despite the unavoidably speculative nature of its conclusions, the overall picture is quite compelling and will likely withstand the scrutiny of further experimental studies. Triggering and guiding the follow-up verification experiments, even if potentially refuting some of the conjectures in the work of Shalaeva et al., may be considered one of the key impacts of this publication
