An insightful and thorough study by Omelchenko et al. brings our attention to one of the most fascinating aspects of enzyme evolution, prolific existence of protein families encoding non-homologous isofunctional enzymes. Authors provided a new census of well-documented cases of such "analogous" enzymes revealing that this phenomenon is much more widespread than could have been expected in the early days of genomics. This new study was largely facilitated by advents of genome sequencing and structural genomics, which helped to correct some of the conclusions in their earlier analysis, especially with respect to distant homologs. A well-dosed combination of the elegantly designed automated analysis with manual case-by-case investigation allowed authors to generate a unique and highly useful dataset provided in the Supplementary Materials. By applying stringent criteria (distinct folds) Omelchenko et al. concluded that at least 1/10 of all enzymes with presently assigned complete EC numbers could have emerged in evolution more than once. Such a high level of evolutionary redundancy is quite remarkable. Another notable conjecture based on the detailed analysis of this data is that the evolution of analogous enzymes appears to be largely driven by recruitment from distinct structural families (folds) featuring similar reactions. It provides another vivid illustration of the patchwork pathway evolution hypothesis of R. Jensen [41]. Abundance of non-homologous isozymes in prokaryotes was shown to correlate with the genome size and their distribution among various folds reflects functional versatility of popular folds (such as TIM barrel and Rossmann fold). This analysis sets a stage for further analysis of interrelationships between evolutionary redundancy and the types of catalyzed chemical reactions. Overall, this study contributes to our appreciation of the abundance of alternative solutions for the same or similar functional tasks that have emerged in course of evolution. In addition to its fundamental importance, this awareness as well as the captured specific knowledge would impact a number of applications in genomics (functional annotations and metabolic reconstruction), bioengineering (directed enzyme/pathway evolution) and drug discovery (identification of selective drug targets).

"Analogous enzymes": outside of juxtaposition (analogous vs homologous) this term may be somewhat misleading. For example, if I'd hear that "these two enzymes are analogous" (outside of context of your paper title, which is helpful), I would think that the meaning is that these are two enzymes (homologous or not) catalyzing similar (analogous) but not identical reactions (e.g. glucokinase and mannokinase). What you mean in fact is "non-homologous isofunctional" enzymes (or "non-homologous isozymes"). You actually made a step towards better term in "analogous isoforms".

How did you deal with multifunctional/multidomain enzymes (such as RibF and such). I understand that they could be handled similarly but it might be worth mentioning in "methods"? Similar question, how do you deal with intrinsically multisubunit (heterooligimers) monofunctional enzymes? For example, how would you treat our newly discovered three-subunit L-LDH (former YkgEFG [64]) vs LldD? The complexity is when the actual roles of subunits (as well as cofactors) are not yet clear (I guess you would skip us for the lack of EC number anyways?).

You seem to be using quite a high hierarchical level (fold) to define "analogy". It is fine and safe. However, as far as I know popular folds (e.g. TIM) may be shared by proteins that are perceived to be evolutionary unrelated (non-homologous). This apparently reflects convergent evolution in the fold space (some folds simply emerge and stick with higher probability?). Is that true? If yes, then you may be underestmating a number of genuine analogous (in the evolutionary sense) pairs?

Specific comments

"Likewise, two ubiquitin thiolesterases, ... actually possess distinct activities, cleaving polyubiquitin chains linked, respectively, to Lys-48 and Lys-63 residues [18]." I either miss something or disagree. If, indeed, the only difference is the position of the polyubiquitinilated lysine in substrate protein, they should be considered analogous. Same deal with any enzymes involved in PTMs or processing of biopolymers, kinases, proteases and so forth. There is no straightforward way to encode their "site-specificity", therefore, in my opinion, for this type of analysis even trypsin and chymotrypsin should be considered as one: "serine endopeptidase of the chymotrypsin family".

I notice that you have missed one of the FGGY kinases: RbtK - D-ribulokinase (EC 2.7.1.47). I disagree that "...Glycerol kinase ...catalyzes a reaction of lipid metabolism..." It is primarily catabolism of glycerol in bacteria. Just skip this statement or be more inclusive.

The sentence "It appears that in each case, gluconate kinase was recruited from a family of kinases with activities toward closely related substrates." is not incorrect but I feel that it puts emphasis in a wrong place. The key is that recruitment happens from families with the same type of chemical reaction (e.g. phosphorylation). Similar or dissimilar substrate is (a) an ambiguous notion (is adenylsulfate similar to gluconate?) and (b) not that important (glycerol and gluconate are distinct enough). How about referring to classic "patchwork hypothesis" of Jensen in this discussion? We actually provided a penny to it in our Science paper [67].

The sentence "It appears that in each case, gluconate kinase was recruited from a family of kinases with activities toward closely related substrates." is not incorrect but I feel that it puts emphasis in a wrong place. The key is that recruitment happens from families with the same type of chemical reaction (e.g. phosphorylation). Similar or dissimilar substrate is (a) an ambiguous notion (is adenylsulfate similar to gluconate?) and (b) not that important (glycerol and gluconate are distinct enough). How about referring to classic "patchwork hypothesis" of Jensen in this discussion? We actually provided a penny to it in our Science paper [67].

In the first paragraph of Discussion, you mention that you use "distinct folds (as) the ultimate proof of analogy", which is fine. However, you could mention that it might be another cause for underestimation of the extent of analogy among enzymes. Likewise, in addition to enzymes that "have not been biochemically characterized" there are also enzymes that were characterized but have not made it to EC nomenclature (or/and public databases like KEGG - just wonder whether you even thought of using SEED for metabolic enzymes, you could find a few interesting cases on top of what you have).

"...recruited from pre-existing enzymes of related specificities..." - same comment. Not wrong but wrong emphasis. Chemistry (type of reaction) is clearly more important for recruitment than "substrate specificity". In the extreme case of "retrograde concept" one would expect glucose isomerase to be recruited from hexokinase family, which is not the main route.

"This has been recognized and successfully dealt with in the case of peptidases (EC 3.4.x.x. [50, 51]) but remains a problem for various protein kinases and protein phosphatases..." I disagree with this view and interpretation (I already expressed it about proteases), but I won't argue. I am sure that plurality of protein kinases and phosphatases is driven by other factors (including "simplicity" of reaction and high "demand" in regulatory networks).

In Conclusions, it is important to choose words carefully to make the message clear. For example: "Sets of analogous, unrelated enzymes were detected for a substantial minority..." I would say at least "Sets of analogous, evolutionary unrelated enzymes (nonhomologous isoforms) were detected for a substantial fraction (up to 10%)".

"...unrelated mechanistic solutions can evolve". Although this claim is not incorrect, it cannot be directly deduced from the existence of "analogous enzymes". As an example, chymotrypsins and subtilisins are both serine proteases (eg they run the same mechanism) while having distinct folds and evolutionary origin. I mean this claim would require a separate analysis of mechanisms. The only solid claim is that the same chemical solutions (with the same or distinct mechanisms) can evolve independently (functional, but not necessarily mechanistic) convergence.