A new study by L. Aravind and colleagues on evolution and functional diversification of the aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase (AAtRS) family is truly fascinating in a number of ways. Using a sophisticated comparative genomics approach, which combines the distant homology and genomic context analysis, they substantially expanded the boundaries of this family including a discovery of its previously unrecognized relationship with cyclodipeptide synthetases (CDPS). This discovery provided crucial evolutionary and mechanistic insights into this "lost tribe" of the AA-tRS clan and demonstrated an amazing functional versatility of the respective fold. The insightful analysis of conserved chromosomal clusters associated with some of the uncharacterized CDPSs opened a Pandora's box of completely unknown and unforeseen biochemical transformation generating a plethora of novel secondary metabolites. Experimental elucidation of these new pathways and their products, which has been enabled by this study, would strongly impact our knowledge of various signaling systems (e.g. host-pathogen interactions) and lead to a discovery of new classes of bioactive compounds. However, as if it was not enough, this paper takes us further, to the analysis of a widespread and extremely interesting family of Met-tRS paralogs, which leads to further expansion of a biochemical landscape of nonribosomal peptidoids. As in the CDPS case, an ingenious combination of phylogenetic and genomic context analyses (already a standard in the field) with fully innovative chemical reasoning allows Aravind et al. to build a very solid case for a number of predicted biosynthetic pathways. The predicted pathways share common themes (eg MettRS-driven condensation of Met and Lys) accompanied by species-specific variations (novel oxidative and nonoxidative modifications of both amino acids). Going back to the overall impact of this paper, one can't help notice that it is not only another triumphant example of creative comparative genomics contributing to better understanding of an important protein family. Its tremendous added value is in providing an incredible opportunity for a small army of experimental biochemists to uncover new processes and molecules with tremendous biomedical potential.
