In the study of Rattray et al., a comparative genomic approach was used to address an exciting (and still unsolved) mystery of ladderane biosynthesis in Kuenenia stuttgartiensis, a bacterium with environmentally and industrially important capability to anaerobically oxidize ammonia. By applying comparative genomic techniques, metabolic reconstruction, analysis of conserved chromosomal clusters, phylogenetic profiles and amino acid substitutions in paralogous enzymes, the authors identified candidate genes that may be responsible for the yet unknown biochemical transformations generating these fascinating polycyclical compounds. A compelling, albeit indirect, evidence is presented that ladderane formation may proceed via polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) intermediates that undergo cascade cyclization by a SAM radical mechanism. This hypothesis, if proven correct, would indicate the existence of a novel variant of PUFA biosynthesis pathway, distinct from those previously described (eg in Shewanella spp). A conservation in the organization of extensive chromosomal clusters containing homologs of FAS-related genes between K. stuttgartiensis and a phylogenetically distant Desulfotalea psychrophila allowed the authors to hypothesize their involvement in related biosynthetic processes. Interestingly, the experimental analysis revealed the presence of PUFA but not ladderanes in the lipid composition of Desulfotalea psychrophila. A possible (although not the only one) interpretation of this finding is that both species share a PUFA synthesis pathway, whereas K. stuttgartiensis may have additional enzyme(s) converting PUFA intermediates to ladderanes. Candidate genes for such enzyme(s) were identified within the same chromosomal cluster. Although this study, taken alone, does not allow us to unambiguously discriminate between the two previously proposed models of ladderane biosynthesis, it sets the stage for the further direct assessment of its tentatively identified components.


