Topological features of rugged fitness landscapes in sequence space

The factors that determine the tempo and mode of protein evolution continue to be a central question in molecular evolution. Traditionally, studies of protein evolution focused on the rates of amino acid substitutions. More recently, with the availability of sequence data and advanced experimental techniques, the focus of attention has shifted toward the study of evolutionary trajectories and the overall layout of protein fitness landscapes. In this review we describe the effect of epistasis on the topology of evolutionary pathways that are likely to be found in fitness landscapes and develop a simple theory to connect the number of maladapted genotypes to the topology of fitness landscapes with epistatic interactions. Finally, we review recent studies that have probed the extent of epistatic interactions and have begun to chart the fitness landscapes in protein sequence space.

Introduction
The unifying question of many areas of biology is how to predict the phenotype (fitness) of an organism based on its genotype. This question takes different forms. In human genetics, it is often reduced to predicting which mutations are deleterious or pathogenic [1]. In evolutionary biology, the question focuses on determining the forces underlying genotypic changes, such as adaptation to environmental conditions [2]. In molecular evolution, the question is often formulated as a challenge to determine the degree to which genotypic change is driven by positive selection [3]. These fields are necessarily focused on studying genotypes that correspond to relatively high fitness (or have done so in the past) or that are very similar to such genotypes, as in the case of disease mutations, because those are the genotypes that are found in nature.

Understanding the genotype-to-phenotype connection, which is often referred to as a fitness landscape (see Glossary) [4], is relevant to many fields of biology. However, even when the issue of a changing environment is ignored (readers are referred to [5] for a detailed model of a fitness landscape affected by environmental change), as we do for the purpose of this review, substantial challenges remain when charting the fitness landscapes of genomes of any appreciable size. First, the number of all possible genotypes (or sequence space) is beyond our theoretical computational capacity even for a single protein sequence, although attempts to explore larger volumes of sequence space are being reported for proteins 6, 7, 8 and small RNA molecules 9, 10, 11. Second, we typically obtain sequence data from extant organisms and, therefore, we chart the sequence landscape from a biased set of sequences that mostly correspond to genotypes conferring high fitness.

When the sequence space is large, the latter bias is inherently limiting. Even reconstructing the evolutionary history of amino acid substitutions during evolution and charting this path through sequence space is typically insufficient to overcome this bias and reveal the overall shape of the fitness landscape. Suppose that we can track the flight trajectory of a fly in a large room. Even if this trajectory is long, of the order of the length of the room, we can infer little about the structure of the space in the room solely based on the flight trajectory. If the trajectory was curved or haphazard, was it because it was the stochastic whim of the fly to fly in such a trajectory or was it trying to avoid large cupboards or small chandeliers?

Another way to overcome this bias is to study the order in which amino acid substitutions have occurred, but this approach also presents the same limitations. What are the factors that cause evolutionary trajectories to proceed along their chosen paths? Genotypes may evolve in the pursuit of better adaptation to specific environmental conditions or due to random genetic drift. Among the possibilities is that the sequence space is full of large or small obstacles (cupboards and lamps) that predetermine which amino acid substitutions are feasible and which are forbidden. In other words, understanding why a genotype leads to low fitness is just as crucial as understanding why a genotype corresponds to a functional phenotype. Thus, to begin to chart the structure of the sequence space it is necessary to observe not only which trajectories are feasible but also those that are impossible [12]. Here we review the complex topological features of fitness landscapes and some of the available methods that may lead to their characterization. We do not attempt a comprehensive review of all of the recent literature on epistasis; the reader may consult the following references addressing epistasis in experimental evolution 13, 14, 15, genetic systems 16, 17, protein [18], RNA 19, 20, and other genomic structures [21], metabolic and regulatory networks and systems biology 22, 23, 24, population structure [25], quantitative genetics [26], and the evolution of sex [27].

Epistasis and the complexity of the fitness landscape
Charting the fitness landscape is trivial if all of the loci in the genotype contribute independently to the fitness. Conversely, the complexity of the fitness landscape is determined by interactions between alleles at different loci (sites), known as epistasis. The notion of independence between sites is seductive in its simplicity and is therefore commonly assumed by theoretical models to give analytic results 28, 29, 30. However, it is plainly false: for instance, amino acid residues in a protein physically interact with their neighbors in the protein structure and thus the fitness of a substitution mutation depends on the size, charge, and other properties of the neighboring residues. Empirical observations suggest that interactions between sites are ubiquitous both within and between different genes 18, 21, 31, 32, 33. The relevant question is not is there epistasis, but how much? The answer to this question lies in our ability to understand fitness landscapes.

The defining property of fitness landscapes is the vastness of the genotype spaces in which they reside. A protein with L sites corresponds to 20L different amino acid sequences. The space that encompasses all of those sequences is an L-dimensional object, where each dimension corresponds to a site with 20 different amino acid states. Each of the 20L sequences in that space has 19L neighbors in protein space (fewer if the genetic code is taken into account or when considering nucleotide sequences), where sequence B is a neighbor of sequence A if only one amino acid substitution is sufficient to make B from A. Therefore, the sequence space can be thought of as a graph in which each sequence is a vertex and edges connect neighboring sequences 4, 34, 35 (Figure 1). Since protein evolution is the process of accumulation of amino acid substitutions, within this Hamming graph evolution can be modeled as movement from one vertex to another, provided that amino acid substitutions are fixed one at a time [34] (but see 36, 37, 38).

Within the sequence space a fitness landscape is formed if each vertex is associated with a nonzero absolute fitness value. The fitness difference between two vertices determines the probability of moving between the two vertices, whereby evolution is much more likely to proceed from a vertex with a lower fitness to that with higher fitness. Such asymmetrical systems in many dimensions are difficult to characterize theoretically or empirically. Thus, for the sake of simplicity, fitness landscapes are often assumed to have binary fitness with vertices corresponding to high or low fitness 39, 40 (but see 41, 42 for visualizations of non-binary fitness landscapes). In that case, the vertices corresponding to low fitness are disconnected from all of their neighbors and the resulting fitness landscape corresponds to a subgraph comprising only vertices with high fitness connected by edges to neighboring vertices with high fitness (Figure 1).

To develop intuition for how fitness landscapes may be described, consider a simple sequence space comprising a string of allele states 1 and 0, representing the derived and the ancestral state, respectively. The order in which 0-to-1 substitutions occur in the course of evolution defines a path in the sequence space. If all paths between the ancestral sequence (all 0s) and the final sequence (all 1s) are possible, the fitness of each genotype can be described as a function of the number of 1s, the derived alleles, even if the input of each 1 is different. To achieve this, an intermediate variable is used called the fitness potential 43, 44, which is the sum of all fitness contributions of all alleles (p = x1 + x2 + … + xn, where xn is the fitness contribution of the derived allele at site n). Fitness is then defined as a function of the fitness potential. In that case, a non-epistatic fitness would be f(p) = ep because a substitution contributes the same relative increase in fitness regardless of when it occurs.

Within the fitness potential framework, two types of epistasis are possible: negative (antagonistic) and positive (synergistic). If the derived allele is beneficial and the fitness (p) grows faster than an exponent, epistasis is positive because the joint effect of substitutions contributes more to the fitness potential then the sum of their individual contributions. Conversely, if fitness grows slower than an exponent it implies that the relative contribution of derived alleles decreases as substitutions accumulate, so their interaction, or epistasis, is negative. However, in both cases the epistasis can be said to be 1D, as the fitness landscape can be described in a single dimension as a function of the fitness potential.

More complicated forms of epistasis become apparent when pairwise interactions between specific loci or sites are considered. Given two sites, if genotypes 00, 01, and 11 have high fitness and genotype 10 has low fitness, the two sites are said to be under sign epistasis [45]. Such pairwise interactions, when three of four possible genotypes confer high fitness, are also called Dobzhansky–Muller (DM) incompatibilities 46, 47, 48, 49. If genotypes 00 and 11 confer high fitness while 01 and 10 confer low fitness, the scenario is called reciprocal sign epistasis.

If sites are interacting epistatically in a manner more complex than pairwise interactions, epistasis is called high order [50] or multidimensional 51, 52. Consider a three-site model in which genotypes 000, 010, 011, and 111 confer high fitness while all other genotypes confer low fitness; this fitness landscape can be described only using three dimensions. Within a landscape with multidimensional epistasis, pairwise interactions can be identified. In the example of the 3D landscape, sign epistasis is found between any pair of sites. However, the two types of epistasis are not equivalent, as epistasis can be multidimensional without being sign epistasis. For example, if the fitness (non-binary in this example) is equal and positive for genotypes 000, 010, 001, 011, and 101 but f(000) < f(100) < f(110) < f(111), the fitness function be described in three dimensions only, but there is no sign epistasis in this landscape.

Fitness landscapes with many peaks surrounded by deep valleys are known as rugged. Such landscapes present a greater challenge for finding the optimal fitness peak compared with smooth landscapes with a single peak. Fitness landscapes without epistasis or with 1D epistasis are not rugged because the fitness function depends on a single quantity and therefore allows only a single peak. Sign epistasis, by contrast, can lead to ruggedness of the fitness landscape because a simple pairwise interaction can result in different fitnesses of similar genotypes, resulting in two separate peaks. However, neither fitness landscape nor epistasis is easy to describe or interpret when fitness is defined by multidimensional interactions. For example, the fitness landscapes describing a local DM incompatibility (Figure 1A,B) are vastly different from those with a DM incompatibility that is independent of higher-order interactions (Figure 1C,D). The same difference between local and global interactions is apparent for reciprocal sign epistasis (Figure 2). The main characteristic of global reciprocal sign epistasis is that of isolated genotypes of high fitness or multiple fitness peaks (Figure 2B).

Understanding the complex multidimensional forms of epistasis is in its infancy and even the terminology for differentiating different hypothetical types of higher-order interactions does not yet exist. Nevertheless, considering multidimensional fitness landscapes may prove to be a useful exercise given that multidimensional epistasis may be more common than appreciated previously 50, 52. One possible way to consider multidimensional landscapes is to estimate what fraction of paths between different points in sequence space may be traversed in the course of evolution without an appreciable decline in fitness.

Let us return to the problem of the fitness landscape on the space of sequences of 0s and 1s, where 0 represents the ancestral allele and 1 represents the derived allele and evolution proceeds by accumulating 0-to-1 substitutions. In the absence of epistasis, every substitution is viable because they all lead to a final state with positive fitness and substitutions may occur in any order. Multidimensional epistasis has the effect of ‘knocking out’ some intermediate sequences (Figure 3). The graph between ancestor and descendant depends on the degree of interaction between amino acid or nucleotide sites and thus provides a measure of epistasis. Feasible descriptions of the fitness landscape are possible even for highly epistatic landscapes (see [53] for a review); in some cases, multidimensional sequence space can be reduced to a smaller number of dimensions. However, if many sites are interacting with each other in unpredictable ways, the dimensionality of the fitness landscape cannot be reduced much further than that of the entire sequence space.

Fitness landscapes shaped by multidimensional epistasis present a great challenge for empirical observation due to the impossibility of assigning fitness values to an astronomical number of different genotypes (Box 1). Therefore, researchers are forced to infer the multidimensionality of the sequence landscape in an indirect manner. At least four interdependent aspects of molecular evolution have been used to infer multidimensional epistasis in fitness landscapes. First, the fitness impact of an amino acid state is expected to be dependent on the genetic background in which it is found. Second, in a multidimensional landscape the number of paths in the sequence space is limited (Box 2) and the order in which mutations accumulate becomes important [51]. Third, substitutions may become conditionally irreversible, whereby the possibility of a substitution to revert may be blocked by other substitutions (Figure 3). Finally, a multidimensional fitness landscape is expected to substantially decelerate the rate of divergence but not to affect how much divergence an evolving sequence can achieve with time (Figure 3). As the number of sites and their interactions considered in a single experiment grows, so does the understanding that multidimensional epistasis may be the right conceptual context to describe fitness landscapes with an appreciable number of sites.

For more detailed treatment of issues related to epistasis and fitness landscapes, the reader is referred to [54] and chapters 6 and 7 of [55]. In our short review we could not do justice to the in-depth treatment of these two works, so we have chosen to highlight them separately.

Studies of the shape of the sequence landscape
Background dependence of fitness impact
Perhaps the simplest prediction of a multidimensional epistatic landscape is that an amino acid state may have a different impact on fitness in a different genetic background. This prediction has been utilized in testing whether amino acid states that typically cause disease in humans have no perceptible negative effects on fitness in other species 18, 49, 56. The high prevalence of differing impacts of fitness of amino acid states in orthologous sites provided an early glimpse of the importance of epistasis in protein evolution. Recently, several studies have focused on a similar idea but utilized different approaches 57, 58, 59. One study focused on detecting a signal of epistasis in long-term protein evolution, predicted from the expected non-epistatic rate of evolution based on the number of different amino acids at orthologous sites [59]. The authors reasoned that, assuming no epistasis, the genetic background should not affect the fitness impact of an amino acid state; thus, if an amino acid is found to be fixed in one species it should also be allowed by selection to be fixed in other species. From large protein sequence alignments it became apparent that, in the proteins under consideration, approximately nine different amino acid states exist at an average site. In a non-epistatic scenario, this implies that at, an average site, eight of 19 possible amino acid substitutions should be uninhibited by selection. Therefore, the expected non-epistatic dn/ds ratio (the ratio of the rate of non-synonymous substitutions to the rate of neutral, synonymous substitutions) was of the order of 8/19. The observed dn/ds ratios in these proteins were up to an order of magnitude lower, suggesting that, in most cases, selection inhibits a substitution to an amino acid state in a species even if the derived amino acid substitution is found fixed in a different clade. In other words, the genetic background in which substitutions are occurring is of profound importance. The result was robust to potential confounding factors such as polymorphisms or sequencing errors [59]. It has been argued that, in principle, these results may have been influenced by the possibility of fixed slightly deleterious amino acid states [60], but we believe that in practice the inference of epistasis is robust to this concern [61].

An experimental evolution approach was taken to study the importance of background for the fitness effects of a specific substitution [62]. The authors solved a similar problem but from the opposite perspective. They asked whether it is possible to introduce a substantially deleterious substitution into a protein and then evolve the genetic background such that the initially deleterious substitution becomes acceptable. The authors expressed in Escherichia coli the human essential enzyme phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK) and introduced the K219S substitution that normally leads to loss of function. Using an experimental design that excluded the reverse S219K substitution, the authors selected for increased PGK function and managed to restore most of the function in just a few generations. Furthermore, it was possible to identify several compensatory substitutions in the structure of PGK that permitted the K219S substitution to confer high fitness. This experiment does not reveal much detail about the nature of the fitness landscape beyond the identification of interactions with site 219. However, one aspect suggests that such experimental evolution approaches may play an increasingly important role in studying fitness landscapes. The K219 state in PGK is an extremely highly conserved state that has not changed for billions of years since the common ancestor of Archaea and Eukaryota. It is remarkable that such states can be changed in just a few generations in the laboratory 62, 63, suggesting that even complex, multidimensional epistatic interactions may be untangled in a feasible timeframe.

These examples demonstrate that, over longer evolutionary distances, the role of the genetic background in determining the fitness impact of an allele is paramount. The study of how short-term genome changes affect the fitness impact of specific alleles is of profound importance in speciation 46, 47, 48 and over the years has received more attention than the question of the effects of long-term genomic changes [64]. However, quantifications of the rate of accumulation of incompatibilities between closely related species remain scarce and researchers predominantly focus on the scale of a gene, utilizing standard genetic approaches, rather than working at the scale of individual amino acid substitutions 65, 66. Furthermore, controversies on the nature and extent of genetic incompatibilities between species remain [67], perhaps in part because the underlying theory 48, 68 has been based on the local and not global shape (but see 54, 69) of the fitness landscape (Figure 1, Figure 2). Examples of recently emerged adaptive alleles having a deleterious effect in one genetic background but a beneficial one in a different genetic background of the same species have been described in detail 70, 71, 72, 73. Further characterization of such examples, coupled with emerging data on segregating incompatibilities 74, 75, may lead to characterization of the importance of background dependence of the fitness impact of alleles on much smaller evolutionary scales.

Order of substitutions in evolution
If epistasis is multidimensional, in evolution some substitutions can occur only after other, permissive substitutions have accumulated 51, 52, 76. One way to test this prediction is to reconstruct the order of substitutions in which evolution proceeded and then to test whether accumulation of the substitutions in a different order is possible 45, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82. A variation of this test was performed recently [82] for a nucleoprotein in the human H3N2 influenza virus. The authors reconstructed in the laboratory the sequence of the virus strain from 1968, which is closely related to the ancestor of a more modern strain of the influenza virus from 2007. Sequencing of the two strains revealed 39 substitutions that occurred during the 40 years of influenza evolution, but not the order in which they occurred. The authors also sequenced different strains of influenza spanning the 40-year period, which enabled them to reconstruct the order in which these substitutions accumulated with a resolution of close to one amino acid. In only a few cases was it impossible to identify which of several substitutions occurred first, leaving some stages along the evolutionary trajectory ambiguous.

These data were then used to address the exciting question of whether the substitutions along the trajectory from 1968 to 2007 would be deleterious if they occurred earlier than they actually did appear. To test this, the authors introduced states from the 2007 strain into the 1968 strain and identified those substitutions that conferred high fitness in the 2007 strain but low fitness in the 1968 strain, indicating that the order in which these substitutions occurred relative to other substitutions was important. Having identified three such substitutions, they identified the interacting substitutions that occurred before, or simultaneously with, these three, which appeared to be related to the structural stability of the protein. This approach cannot identify all epistatic interactions, as it is feasible that an amino acid state is acceptable in the 2007 and 1968 backgrounds but is unacceptable somewhere along the evolutionary trajectory. Nevertheless, the study [82] serves as an important proof of principle that such an approach is feasible to study a highly epistatic fitness landscape and detect a substantial level of epistasis. Given many sequences from extant species it may be possible to reconstruct the ancestral states 30, 77 with enough accuracy to apply this approach to a wide variety of proteins without the necessity of direct sampling of ancestral states. However, for the foreseeable future this approach may be limited to the study of proteins that can be functionally characterized in viruses and microbes.

Irreversible and non-repeatable evolution
The key distinction of molecular evolution in epistatic landscapes is irreversibility of substitutions. Of course, the trivial reversibility of retracing all substitutions in the opposite order to which they occurred is always feasible. However, once an amino acid substitution occurs, the probability that the substitution can be reversed at the present moment declines as other substitutions accumulate 83, 84, 85, 86. Several studies have observed this effect using different data. A direct approach was taken by mapping human disease data to orthologous ancestral states of human proteins [87]. Up to 10% of all ancestral states were estimated to be irreversible, in that they are expected to cause a disease-like decline in fitness if they were to occur in a human, suggesting a complex, multidimensional fitness landscape. Some studies considered specific irreversible states in the laboratory 77, 88.

A similar prediction can be made for two diverging sequences on an epistatic fitness landscape. The probability that an amino acid state confers different fitnesses in these diverging sequences is then expected to increase with sequence divergence between them. Several studies report this pattern across a diversity of phylogenetic clades. One study measured the change of the average fitness impact of an amino acid state across time. Sites where a 0-to-1 substitution occurred previously were surveyed for the density of reversal polymorphisms (1 to 0), demonstrating that such polymorphisms were more common in sites where the initial substitution was more recent [85]. Consistent with this observation, the probability that an amino acid substitution that converges two sequences (0-to-1 substitution occurs at a site where one species has 0 and the other 1) declines with divergences between the sequences 83, 84, 86.

Rate and extent of sequence divergence
A subtle consequence of a multidimensional fitness landscape is the effect of complex interactions on the rate of protein evolution. In a highly epistatic landscape, protein sequence divergence may have two seemingly contradictory properties. Divergence may proceed at a much slower rate than neutral sequence divergence yet be virtually unlimited in terms of how far a sequence may diverge from its starting point. Indeed, both of these aspects are among the most universal observations of protein evolution. Most proteins evolve more slowly than the neutral rate, as indicated by dn/ds < 1 for all kinds of protein in all kinds of organism [89]. Similarly, a sequence similarity search for most proteins reveals distantly related homologs, often with sequence identities closer to the theoretical limit of detection [30]. A constant, non-epistatic fitness landscape cannot reconcile these two observations [90]. Strong non-epistatic selection leads to a substantial reduction in the rate of evolution; however, simultaneously it greatly reduces the distance to which such sequences can diverge from their direct orthologs. In essence, in a non-epistatic model there is a fundamental trade-off between the rate of protein evolution and the limit of sequence divergence, whereby it is impossible to achieve divergence across large distances in sequence space at a slow rate of divergence. Data show that even the oldest and most slowly evolving proteins continue to diverge from each other [84]. A protein can diverge far in sequence space but very slowly if the fitness landscape itself is not constant, whereby infrequent bursts of positive selection in specific clades may cause the same pattern. Nevertheless, in conjunction with other data, the argument for slow but prolonged evolution as evidence of pervasive epistasis has been made [61].

Formulation of basic questions about the sequence landscape
Almost a century after the formulation of the concept of fitness landscapes, understanding their dimensionality and shape remains one of the central questions in biology. Most studies of protein function and evolution tend to focus on sequences that are observed in nature and the evolutionary trajectories that such proteins chart through sequence space. While such studies have undoubtedly contributed to our understanding of molecular evolution, the lack of attention toward unobserved trajectories has limited our understanding of the shape of fitness landscapes. With this limitation in mind, we reformulate some of the classical questions in molecular evolution, some of which were formulated by John Maynard Smith in 1970 [34], to a similar set of unresolved questions that target a fitness landscape-oriented direction for future research.

Four questions can be formulated on the global shape of the fitness landscape. How many dimensions are necessary to describe a fitness landscape? We believe that it may be feasible to address this question either for a specific protein encompassing the entire sequence landscape or for the broader genome when considering only those sites where substitutions have been observed 59, 82. Universally conserved sites and neutral sites may represent a possible way to identify reductions in the dimensionality of the fitness landscape, although the identification of sites where some amino acid states are universally neutral and the others are universally deleterious may present a greater challenge.

Given recent evidence, the question of how much epistasis there is in a typical fitness landscape is becoming pertinent to many fields 50, 53, 54. The dimensionality of the landscape – that is, the number of sites in a sequence needed to define the fitness function – does not necessarily reflect the degree of epistasis (Figure 3). The fitness landscape of a protein of length L in which, for an amino acid state at each site, there is just one combination of other sites that corresponds to low fitness, has a low degree of epistasis, yet it would require L dimensions to describe the fitness landscape. We suggest that the right metric to describe the degree of epistasis is the fraction of all possible evolutionary paths that are available (Box 2), although this is likely to be more complicated in a more realistic scenario when fitness is not binary 45, 91, 92.

Are there unconnected fitness landscapes within a broadly defined sequence landscape of a protein (Figure 2B)? If so, it is possible that the current distribution of protein sequences is isolated from other variants and may be explained in part due to random origins of the first protein sequence across the sequence space. The exploration of random protein sequences 93, 94 or experimental convergence of protein functions in sequence space [95] may be among the methods used to study this aspect of sequence space.

The next two pertinent questions are directed at the local topology of the sequence space. How common are DM incompatibilities in fitness landscapes? Despite the apparent simplicity of this question it is not easy to formulate a quantifiable measure for a potential answer. One can measure this as a fraction of accumulated incompatibilities between independently evolving lineages [48], although so far the data have been difficult to interpret 49, 67. How common are mutually exclusive incompatibilities (sign epistasis) in fitness landscapes? Such incompatibilities are thought to be theoretically plausible 36, 37 and are thought to play a role in tRNA evolution [38], yet it is unclear whether such incompatibilities have a role in protein evolution. As with DM incompatibilities, this question may be addressed by measuring the rate of accumulation of mutually exclusive alleles in two diverging lineages. However, the observation of an incompatibility between two lineages does not mean that it had an effect on the evolutionary trajectory taken. Therefore, when addressing the issue of the prevalence of DM and mutually exclusive incompatibilities in fitness landscapes it is prudent to distinguish between incompatibilities that have accumulated through independent evolution and incompatibilities that have affected the evolutionary trajectory. To quantify the importance of incompatibilities that affect the evolutionary trajectory, it may be best to focus on a microevolutionary scale by studying how frequently such incompatibilities are found in standing variation 74, 75.

When addressing the issue of prevalence of DM and mutually exclusive incompatibilities, another, underappreciated issue must be considered. Both types of incompatibility may have a local effect whereby the interaction of alleles at a couple of loci is incompatible in only a certain region of sequence space (Figures 1A,B and 2A). Alternatively, the incompatibility may have a global effect whereby the two alleles are incompatible regardless of the genetic background (Figures 1C,D and 2B). Whether incompatibilities are local or global in their manifestation on the fitness landscape remains to be addressed [50].

The final question deals with the directionality of fitness landscapes in sequence space. How often do reversals of previous substitutions play a role in defining the broader fitness landscape? Even in a multidimensional and highly epistatic fitness landscape it may be possible to find a path between two sequences without having to reverse any substitutions. Such paths are possible (in the case of five loci with two alleles, if the only path between sequences 00000 and 11111 is 00000 ↔ 10000 ↔ 11000 ↔ 11100 ↔ 10100 ↔ 10110 ↔ 10111 ↔ 11111) and have been observed in at least one protein [88].

Concluding remarks
The fitness landscape as an abstract multidimensional representation of the genotype–phenotype relationship has been notoriously difficult to characterize. There is increasing evidence that characterizing the multidimensional topological complexities of the fitness landscape has profound implications for our understanding of macro- and, possibly, microevolution. Increasing sequence availability and advances in molecular and genetic techniques are certain to provide further empirical data on this issue. Taking into consideration the global aspects of the fitness landscape and characterizing genotype–phenotype landscapes in a multidimensional context may become more feasible and more common in the future.


