Since its discovery, A. pompejana has been of great interest in regard to the question of how a metazoan might tolerate environmental extremes such as those it faces. Holder et al. use deep transcriptome sequence combined with bioinformatics analysis to attempt to explain the unusual thermotolerance of Alvinella pompejana. A key point made by this study is that the earlier analysis of Alvinella sequences might not have necessarily identified the actual basis for thermostability of proteins in this organism. In particular, the reported features are shared with mesophilic lophotrochozoans, suggesting that they might not be genuine discriminants of thermophily. In this regard, the extended proteome generated from sequence data obtained by the authors is a useful resource. Further, the study shows that the metrics for thermophily that were found to be successful in discriminating prokaryotic thermophily cannot be uncritically applied to eukaryotes.

The authors might want to consider a few points:

While they used length of the trimmed sequence in the alignment as a possible discriminant, it might be better to directly measure intrinsic disorder or sequence entropy and use them as potential discriminants. This is of interest because in general eukaryotes have much great amount of low complexity sequence in their proteins than prokaryotes (especially low complexity sequence enriched in charge or polar residues or both). While other factors affect the amount of low complexity in eukaryotes does thermophily have a negative effect on it.
Most homeothermic metazoans tend to maintain higher body temperatures than the rest. In their analysis of CvP Homo, a homeothermic metazoan is ranked next after the thermophilic species. However, a species with a much lower preferred temperature is also close. Is there any significance to this? Would it be possible to use some bird species in the comparison as they have much higher body temperatures (Gallus/Zebra Finch ~41 C). Would they show a higher rank in the CvP measure than other species in the current figure?
While the data is currently very limited, are there any possible explanations for the CvP being more successful as a discriminant than other measures in eukaryotes?