Zhang et al show that the globular domain found C-terminal to the HMG domain in Maelstrom is a member of the 3'–>5' exonuclease superfamily of the RNase H fold. This finding leads to a key functional prediction that might help in understanding the role of this major regulator of gene expression which lies at the interface between the RNA-dependent process and chromatin dynamics. The basic relationship proposed here is sound; however, the authors note that the active site of this domain might have drastically been reconfigured in subset of the family with the utilization of an entirely new constellation of residues. This is a rather bold proposal based on homology modeling and the observed conservation. However, it is weakened by the fact that, as observed correctly by the authors, the canonical active site is preserved outside of the animal radiation along with the maelstrom family specific residues preserved in animals. This makes the claim suspect as it would imply that both active sites were simultaneously present in the ancestor. Hence, I strongly recommend that the authors completely rework this section and concede the strong possibility of the absence of nuclease activity in the forms lacking the canonical active site. It is quite possible that at least in animals it is an inactive RNA-binding protein.
        Further, there are several points in the paper that need to be addressed for it to be suitable for publication.-Nomenclatural: Currently the authors use the term DNAQ-H for the superfamily. This is confusing as one could imagine that these indeed arose from DNAQ itself. Instead they should use the terminology "3'–>5' exonuclease superfamily in the RNAse H fold".-Phylogenetic analysis: The resolution is probably insufficient and the topology of the tree appears suspect as a result. Further some proteins are evolving very rapidly and at different rates and distort topology (e.g. Entamoeba). The tree is not critical for the argument and it is best that it is presented in the additional file.-Introduction is too long. The authors can very briefly state the importance of Mael and its biology rather than attempting the current detailed description.-The key functional prediction and sequence/structure analysis can be also briefly presented.-Rename DUF1777 to something more meaningful.In conclusion a modified version of the paper, which is suitably condensed and presents the major findings succinctly would be suitable for publication as a discovery note in Biology Direct.