In this manuscript, the author responds to criticisms of his prior work that provides a Bayesian framework for formally testing the hypothesis that all life descends from a single common ancestor. Specifically, Koonin and Wolf provided a set of simulations that demonstrate that the same test will incorrectly identify sequences with similar composition that are independently generated as being related. In this paper, several additional tests are provided, including the demonstration that star phylogenies (in which all sequences stem from a single common ancestor with no branching structure) explain the simulated data but not real sequence data, as does a profile model in which sequences are independently generated from a profile with no phylogenetic structure. The key conceptual advance is to perform model selection, rather than to test deviations from a null hypothesis that may be inappropriate.
Overall, the calculations are convincing, although the article could benefit from being rewritten in a less combative tone and as a less narrow response to a single article. I am also somewhat unconvinced by the relevance of the material on the genetic code to the problem of convergent versus divergent protein evolution: a better example might be the repeated evolution of the same Trp or Ile active site, each of which has been demonstrated many times in different selections, which could provide the basis for truly independent evolutionary origins and which might therefore be interesting to analyze in the context of the present framework. The so-called "Welch-mer" also provides a fascinating example of the same site apparently evolving in nature and in SELEX. I would recommend omitting the section on the genetic code and replacing it with a discussion on reproducibility of SELEX, in which area several authors have done interesting work.
The paper is generally well-written and, with the caveats above, in my opinion suitable for publication after revision. It might benefit from shortening, as some of the points are overly belabored in the current presentation. A more concise discussion focusing on the main ideas, i.e. the importance of model selection, the assumptions of the Koonin & Wolf model, and the consequences of these assumptions in distinguishing simulated and real data would likely increase readership substantially relative to the present version.