In this manuscript, the authors investigate the hypothesis that the genetic code was optimized at an earlier stage of evolution in which only the first two codon positions were used for coding. They construct a simplified genetic code table in which the third position nucleotide is always fully degenerate, using several sources of evidence as a guide. Using a cost function that they have used for previous analyses, they show that this simplified code is much better at minimizing the effects of errors than are permuted versions of the same code. The results are interesting and provide additional evidence that the genetic code was likely optimized at an earlier stage of evolution than the present (e.g. Marquez et al. 2005 and other work that shows that current genetic messages are not optimized), and for the hypothesis that the code evolved from a simpler form in which the third codon position was not read.
The list of early amino acids is plausible and derived from a combination of the Murchison meteorite, prebiotic synthesis and metabolic pathway evidence, which are the best available data and show remarkable consensus. The parsimony rules also seem reasonable and well-specified. The observation that the putatively early amino acids seem to be most highly optimized is intriguing, and, as the authors note, most previous attempts to reconcile adaptation in the code with other mechanisms have assumed that adaptation was a relatively late overlay in a code where the earliest amino acids were fixed by other principles. The suggestion that stereochemistry played a greater role in the assignment of later amino acids is interesting, and to my knowledge novel. It will be fascinating to see whether additional amino acids for which strong stereochemical evidence is found tend to be on the "early" or "late" list. It would be a useful addition to the manuscript if the authors could explain how late stereochemical entry of amino acids could be reconciled with Wolf & Koonin's 2007 model of code evolution. The idea that the code's robustness peaked at an early stage and has since been declining is also interesting and may provide a fruitful inspiration for future modeling efforts.
One minor quibble: the manuscript states that the stereochemical theory and the coevolution theory "cannot account for the high level of error minimization in the standard code". This isn't quite right: if either the stereochemical theory or the coevolution theory were to fully explain the code table (although only the most ardent proponents of either theory would claim that this is the case, as most researchers in the field now take a pluralist approach) then the high level of error minimization would be explained as a side-effect of the real underlying mechanism and not as something that required an adaptive explanation in itself (in the same way that the red color of blood is a side-effect of selection for its ability to carry oxygen, not an adaptation in and of itself).
Overall, this is an interesting and well-executed piece of research that provides new insight into the tangled pathways by which the genetic code apparently evolved.