In this manuscript, Puigbo et al. describe their CAIcal web server. CAI, the Codon Adaptation Index, is an important concept relating codon usage to gene expression. Although several software tools online already calculate CAI, CAIcal appears to offer a unique combination of functionality that is not easily duplicated using other tools.
However, the tool in its current form would appear to be a relatively minor advance over existing tools, and I would strongly encourage the authors to consider an extensive overhaul of the software and the manuscript before publication. However, I think the present work contains the seeds of a useful contribution to the field and to the literature, and definitely encourage the authors to persevere, perhaps thinking more carefully about the target audience of the software and the paper.
More attention needs to be paid to the specific contribution of this work if it is to be published as an independent piece of software. No feature of this tool really appears to be unique, e.g. the plots of CAI along a gene and codon-by-codon are also in Codon Analyser (as the authors note), many tools allow calculation of CAI against a reference set, etc.
Although I appreciate that the authors have made the effort to produce and distribute a standalone version, the code unfortunately does not inspire confidence in the web site either in this case. Test cases, e.g. using Perl's built-in unit testing framework, would definitely be a useful addition to verify that the calculations are correct.
The utility of the Monte Carlo approach is also somewhat unclear to me, as it appears that the expected CAI could be calculated analytically, along with confidence intervals, using the multinomial distribution. It is possible that this is not feasible for numerical reasons, but some justification of the approach would be useful.
I did not find the example especially compelling, but this is a relatively minor criticism and I understand that it is likely that the authors would want to publish any especially interesting results separately from the description of the tool itself. However, it might be interesting to try to reproduce a well-known conclusion from existing work to show how much easier it is with this workflow than with pre-existing tools. There are many examples in the literature as CAI is such a widely-used technique.
The manuscript and the web site need substantial attention to the quality of the English. I have not corrected minor wording and grammatical errors in this version of the manuscript, but if the authors plan to publish this manuscript regardless of the above comments, I would definitely recommend careful attention to detail, and also removing formatting errors such as the text "Sub-heading for this section" on page 3. Overall, I think this is a good first attempt and could ultimately be revised into a useful contribution that is more suitable for publication.