The authors describe a web service for structure prediction of peptides containing modified/unnatural amino acids. They developed a pipeline using AMBER or GROMACS, depending on the available force field parameters for the given amino acids in the peptide. I feel that the concept is useful but I am not fully satisfied with the presentation of the results. In particular, I would like to ask the authors to address the following points:
Comment 1: I would like to see more details about the conformation assigned to the ‘X’ amino acids. For example, for residues in the D configuration, are the L-counterparts taken into account or are they also treated as ‘X’? It would be worth to analyze how this influences the prediction of secondary structures and to what extent the differences between predicted and actual structures - where it can be assessed - come from erroneous assignment of the starting conformation of the ‘X’ residue.
Comment 2: In connection, it would be useful to include/refer to a critical evaluation of the incorporated secondary structure prediction methods for some unmodified peptides. Also, I am not fully convinced that the backbone torsion angles 180/180 can be referred to as ‘ideal’ for ‘coil’ residues as ‘coil’ refers to everything that is not alpha-helix of beta-sheet in this context.
Comment 3: In the evaluation of correspondence of predicted vs, experimental structures I would like to see the final predicted torsion angles as they might be more informative than RMSD values. in particular, even if an RMSD is relatively high, some important aspects of the structure, the presence of an important local structural motif might be predicted accurately. For structures where NMR restraints are available it could be also useful to analyze the correspondence of the predicted structures to these.
Comment 4: The limitations of the method should be discussed, i.e. what is the maximum length of a peptide that can be predicted within a reasonable time and how many nonstandard residues are allowed. E.g. are two consecutive modified residues allowed/expected to be modeled accurately?
Comment 5: Have the authors tested longer MD runs/simulated annealing protocols? Please comment on this whether any of these could be expected to improve the results.
Comments from second revision

The authors have put a lot of work into improving the manuscript compared to the initial version and I appreciate their efforts. The authors have extended their comparison methodology even though I did not get a direct answer for my point about torsion angles and NMR restraints. I think that the manuscript is now suitable for publication.