The problem discussed in the manuscript is important and original. Finding a reliable set of coevolving residues is a nontrivial task. The approach of combining a number of recently developed methods is promising and it can be expected that it is capable of yielding results superior to any particular singular approach included.

Comment 1: The sequence data set used in the study is selected and curated with care. However, I expected to find some information on the quality of the alignments prepared. In particular, the diversity of the sequences and the number of gaps might be critical for such a coevolutionary study.
Comment 2: The interpretation of the results is generally acceptable, and the shortcomings of the methods and the possible pitfalls in the interpretation are discussed properly. I feel that the types of data discussed are a bit too limited (a single HIV-1 subtype).
Comment 3: The methods are generally appropriate and well-described. The choice of 8 Angstroms for contact distance should be described in more detail, I guess it refers to the closest heavy atom-heavy atom distance in the two residues. As such a choice is always arbitrary (even if it is common in the literature), it is desirable to investigate the dependence of the results on its exact value, e.g. to take into account structural variability (as the authors use single PDB structures for each protein) and possible internal dynamics of the proteins investigated.
Comment 4: In the ensemble coevolution method the authors used equal weights according to the supplementary material, so the authors might want to consider to put less emphasis in the description of the weighting, which is obviously a further possibility to explore.
Comment 4: The strength of the methods used is the inclusion and comparison of a number of different algorithms. Most of the weaknesses are presented properly and are generally applicable to similar coevolutionary studies. The manuscript is supported by rich supplementary data, which is important for the understanding and reproducibility of the results. I especially welcome that the authors provide the MATLAB source code for their ensemble method. The writing and organization of the manuscript is clear, the figures are appropriate and informative, although I think that Figures 3 and ​and44 could go as supplementary material, especially as the data presented in Figure 3A are closely related to those shown in Table 1. I would suggest that the authors consider the following points for preparing the final version of the manuscript:
Comment 5: I would have desired a short outlook with an alternative data set (e.g. a single protein from a wider range of HIV1 subtypes, as mentioned by the authors as a potential source of conflict with results of an independent study) and the discussion of an example where coevolving residues are clearly not in spatial contact.
Comment 6: The alignments themselves could be provided as supplementary material allowing for straightforward reproduction of the data; they could also be used as a test data set for prospective users.
Comment 7: The authors might want to rerun the evaluation by using different contact thresholds in the structures: values of e.g. 7 and 9 Angstrom could be tested and evaluated as a verification of the robustness of the method.
Minor issues not for publication:
Comment 1: I would refrain from using the word “fullerene core” as it might be confusing (refers to a geometric similarity but has nothing to do with fullerene molecules).
Comment 2: The authors seem to use the word “domain” instead of “subunit” to refer to protein chains in multimeric structures, this should be corrected/clarified before final publication.