The presented research deals with the identification of pluripotency genes from TF binding, epigenetic signature and gene expression data using a machine-learning approach. I think that the study is both timely and well-conducted and the results are novel and important and the list of putative pluripotency genes merits further investigations. The relatively modest performance of the predictions reveal the importance of further research in the area.
Major recommendations:
It might be worth providing a list of the identified pluripotency genes and their relationship in mouse and human (as supplementary material).
Is Z-score-based normalization justified in all cases? I mean, there might be bimodal or more complex distance distributions. Please comment on that whether there are such cases and whether these can affect the conclusions.
Minor recommendations:
According to the description, only the distance from the TSS is considered. Please comment on whether the direction could be important (and whether it would be technically feasible to consider it).
It might be worth to provide some notes about the precision of the location of the epigenetic marks/TF binding sites with highest found predictive values.
It could be worth to add a short discussion about the differences between hESCs and mESCs, to what extent might these come from our differential knowledge/data availability and existing biological differences between the organisms.
“We were able to identify common patterns predictive of pluripotency genes in mouse and human ESCs, suggesting conserved pathways may regulate the chromatin landscape of pluripotency genes across species. However, specific features were found to be predictive in only mouse (e.g. Sin3a distance) or human (e.g. H3K9me3 count). The existence of non-overlaping features predictive of pluripotency between mouse and human could result from the fact that some features were only available in one of the species, and that there are some partial cryptic redundancy over these features. However, it may also likely be the result of fundamental differences in the biology of hESC and mESC [1, 2], with in particular hESC being in a less ‘naïve’ state than their murine counterparts. Thus, the differences we observed in the chromatin signature of pluripotency genes may also be a symptom of species differences of or of these divergent states of ‘naïve-ness’, and could help shed light on the mechanisms underlying these differences.”
Please provide more details about the relationship between the count and breadth of certain marks. In these cases it could be important to see the exact distribution of the data correlated.
Please clarify that in Step3 (Classification and model training) you have selected the negative gene set _in addition_ to the list of known pluripotency genes and that this 500 times repeated procedure is the same as mentioned in “Identification of ‘canonical’ pluripotency genes”
In Additional file 4: Table S2, please indicate which genes you regard as putative pluripotency genes.
I would suggest combining all data into a single multi-tab Excel file for easier handling.