Influence of long-range contacts and surrounding residues on the transition state structures of proteins
Author links open overlay panel

Abstract
Understanding the parameters influencing the formation of transition state structures in proteins is an important problem in protein folding and kinetics. In this work, we have analyzed the structure-based parameters, surrounding hydrophobicity, secondary structure, solvent accessibility, number of medium- and long-range contacts, and surrounding residues for understanding the transition state structures of 15 proteins. The analysis of Φ-values shows that 29% of the studied 378 mutants have a Φ-value of more than 0.5. The combination of different structure-based parameters could discriminate the residues that have a Φ-value cutoff of more than 0.5 with a 5-fold cross-validation accuracy of 68%, which indicates that the surrounding residues and contacts play important roles in the formation of transition state structures. Systematic analysis on different proteins reveals that the proteins azurin, cold shock protein, and C-terminal domain of ribosomal protein L9 are influenced by the number of medium- and long-range proteins, whereas barnase, FK506 binding protein, and IM9 are influenced by surrounding residues. The discrimination accuracy lies in the ranges of 81–95% and 74–85% for these respective classes of protein. Furthermore, the combination of surrounding residues and contacts improved the accuracy up to 24% in other considered proteins. We suggest that the structure-based parameters along with noncovalent interactions and conservation of residues may aid in identifying the potential residues in the formation of transition state structures in proteins.

Keywords
Protein structure Long-range contacts Surrounding residues Φ-value Kinetics

The process of protein folding must follow a specific pathway or set of pathways to fold in a finite time [1]. In protein folding, there is no single microscopic reaction coordinate that every chain follows, and there might not be identifiable barriers of the traditional type because energy landscapes may be funnel-shaped [2]. Hence, the mechanism of protein folding has been addressed with mutational studies of folding rates and equilibrium constants [3]. This methodology developed as Φ-value analysis has been widely used to characterize the transition state structures of proteins and applied to many different proteins such as chymotrypsin inhibitor, FK506 binding protein, and barnase [4], [5], [6]. These studies reveal that the transition state is consistent with hydrophobic collapse and nucleation condensation mechanisms [4], [7].

The experimentally determined Φ-values on amino acid substitutions have been used to predict critical residues in protein folding. The residues with high Φ-values form folding nuclei in protein structures that have a critical set of interactions for folding and rapid assembly of their native states [8], [9]. The availability of Φ-values for several proteins prompted researchers to identify the folding nuclei and map Φ-values on protein structures.

Galzitskaya and Finkelstein [10] developed a method based on a search for free energy saddle points on a network of protein unfolding pathways to identify folding nuclei in three-dimensional protein structures. Poupon and Mornon [11] proposed a correspondence between conserved hydrophobic positions in amino acid sequences (topohydrophobic positions) and folding nuclei in protein structures. Mirny and Shakhnovich [12] extended the approach on conservation of amino acid residues based on physical–chemical properties and proposed a parameter, variability, to identify the folding nuclei in protein structures. Gromiha and Selvaraj [13] analyzed the relationship between amino acid properties and the Φ-values of 117 mutations in three proteins and revealed the important properties for the formation of transition state structures. Furthermore, they proposed a hydrophobic contact network pattern with long-range contacts to relate the Φ-values and understand the transition state structures of folded proteins [14].

Zarrine-Afsar and coworkers [15] carried out a quantitative analysis on the influence of topology for determining the transition state structures of proteins and showed that proteins with similar topologies share common transition state structures. Shmygelska [16] developed a simple, efficient, and robust algorithm to identify folding nuclei in protein structures based on (i) finding an ensemble of pathways with the lowest effective contact order and (ii) identifying contacts that are crucial for folding. Recently, Nölting and coworkers [17] showed that the protein folding forces can be used to estimate folding movements in three categories: helix compression, sheet condensation, and strand consolidation.

In spite of these studies, it is necessary to relate the structure-based parameters with transition state structures of proteins and estimate the ability of these parameters for discriminating the critical residues in protein structures. In this work, we have computed the parameters surrounding hydrophobicity (Hp),1 medium- and long-range contacts, solvent accessibility, secondary structure (SS), and the surrounding residues of all residues in 15 considered proteins. The computed parameters were related with experimental Φ-values using machine learning techniques. The accuracy of discrimination was used to analyze the relative importance of these parameters for understanding the transition state structures of proteins.

Materials and methods
Experimental Φ-values
We used the experimental Φ-values of 378 mutants in 15 proteins as the main source for the current study. These data were obtained from the literature reported by Nölting and coworkers [17]. The solvent accessibility and secondary structure information was obtained from DSSP algorithm [18]. The experimental data, along with other computed parameters, are available in Supplementary Table S1 in the supplementary material.

Surrounding residues
Each residue in a protein molecule is represented by its α carbon atom. The distances between the α carbon atoms of a pair of residues in a protein molecule provide the information about the residue contacts in protein structures. We fixed the distance of 8 Å, and the residues that come within this distance are termed as surrounding residues. It has been shown that the influence of each residue over the surrounding medium extends effectively up to only 8 Å, and this limit has been used in several studies on protein folding and stability [19], [20], [21].

The surrounding residues are classified into seven groups based on their chemical behavior and used for discrimination. These groups are (i) aliphatic (Ala, Ile, Leu, and Val), (ii) aromatic (Phe, Trp, and Tyr), (iii) sulfur containing (Cys and Met), (iv) Gly, (v) positively charged (His, Lys, and Arg), (vi) negatively charged (Asp and Glu), and polar (Asn, Pro, Gln, Ser, and Thr).

Surrounding hydrophobicity
The amino acid residues in a protein molecule are represented by their α carbon atoms, and each residue is assigned with the hydrophobicity index obtained from thermodynamic transfer experiments [22], [23]. The surrounding hydrophobicity of a given residue is defined as the sum of hydrophobic indexes of various residues that appear within an 8-Å radius limit from it [24]:
where nij is the total number of surrounding residues of type j around ith residue of the protein and hj is the experimental hydrophobic index of residue type j (in kcal/mol) [22], [23].

Medium- and long-range contacts
For a given residue, the composition of surrounding residues within a sphere of an 8-Å radius is analyzed in terms of their location at the sequence level. The residues that are within a distance of 2 residues from the central residue are considered to contribute to short-range interactions, those within a distance of 3 or 4 residues are considered to contribute to medium-range interactions, and those more than 4 residues away are considered to contribute to long-range interactions [21]. The long-range contacts are further divided into several bins (e.g., 5–10, 11–20, 21–30, and >30 residues). The contacts are normalized with number of residues in a protein.

Machine learning techniques
We analyzed several machine learning techniques implemented in the WEKA program [25] for discriminating the residues with the cutoff Φ-value of 0.5. This program includes several methods based on Bayes functions, neural networks, logistic functions, support vector machines, regression analysis, nearest neighbor methods, meta learning, decision trees, and rules. The details of these methods were explained in our previous article [26].

n-Fold cross-validation method
We performed 2- and 5-fold cross-validation tests for assessing the validity of the current work. In this method, the data set is divided into n groups; n − 1 of them are used for training, and the rest are used for testing the method. The same procedure is repeated n times, and the average is computed to obtain the accuracy of the method.

Results and discussion
Distribution of Φ-values
We analyzed the distribution of Φ-values in a data set of 378 mutants in 15 proteins, and the results are shown in Fig. 1. We noticed that more than 82% of the characterized residues in these proteins exhibit a Φ-value below 0.6 and that only 7% produce a Φ-value in the range of 0.8 to 1.2. Furthermore, the structural interpretation of Φ-values seems to be ambiguous due to the fact that approximately 86% of all Φ-values fall between zero and unity, which are termed as “partial Φ-values.” There are two interpretations for partial Φ-values: (i) a region of the polypeptide chain is partially native-like in all of the molecules in the transition state ensemble and (ii) the transition state is heterogeneous (e.g., a Φ-value of 0.5 will arise if a given position is fully native-like in half of the molecules and is unfolded in the remaining molecules) [27]. In addition, negative Φ-values are interpreted as a mutation that stabilizes the folding transition state while it destabilizes the native state [28] and result from energetic changes in the denatured state ensemble caused by mutations [29]. We used different Φ-value cutoffs of 0.4, 0.5, and 0.6 for the current study, and the results are reported for the data obtained with the cutoff of 0.5.

Variation of structural parameters at different Φ-value cutoffs
We computed the frequency of occurrence of mutants based on surrounding hydrophobicity, secondary structure, and solvent accessibility at different Φ-value cutoffs, and the results are presented in Table 1. The data presented in this table reveal that the residues with the two extreme surrounding hydrophobicities (<10 and >20 kcal/mol) are enriched for high Φ-value mutations. On the other hand, the residues with the intermediate ranges (10–15 and 15–20 kcal/mol) are progressively depleted as the Φ-value cutoff increases. This result suggests the formation of hydrophobic clusters when a protein progresses from transition state to folded native state. The solvent accessibility analysis indicates the occurrence of a larger number of residues in the buried core than in the partially exposed/exposed regions. Hence, the burial of polar residues may influence the transition state structures. We also noticed that the fraction of residues with accessible surface area (ASA) < 25 Å2 moderately decreased with an increase of Φ-value cutoffs, whereas an opposite trend was observed for the fraction of residues with ASA > 25 Å2. Based on secondary structure, the mutants are enriched in helical segments, whereas coil is depleted and strand is neutral with respect to occurrence in high Φ-value mutants versus the total population of mutants.

Discrimination of transition state structure-forming residues
We used the parameters Hp, ASA, SS, number of medium- and long-range contacts, and information on surrounding residues for discriminating the transition state structure-forming residues. The overall analysis showed the highest discrimination accuracy of 67.7% with sensitivity and specificity of 49.5% and 75.1%, respectively. The accuracy was 65.1% with similar levels of sensitivity (62.3%) and specificity (67.0%). This result reveals that the structure-based parameters carry a certain level of information to understand the transition state structures. However, additional parameters may be necessary to predict the transition state-forming residues in general.

The comparative analysis on the influence of contacts, surrounding residues, and other parameters for all of the studied proteins are presented in Table 2. Interestingly, the proteins azurin (5AZU), cold shock protein (1CSP), and N-terminal domain of ribosomal protein L9 (1DIV) are influenced by medium- and long-range contacts, and the transition state structure-forming residues are discriminated with a 2-fold cross-validation accuracy of 81–95%. The contact details for the residues with high Φ-values are presented in Table 3. It is noteworthy that all of the residues with high Φ-values in 5AZU have several long-range contacts with a sequence separation of more than 30 residues. In 1CSP, four of six residues have such contacts and Phe15 has six long-range contacts in the range of 4 to 20 residues. In 1DIV, three residues have more than three long-range contacts with a sequence separation of either more than 30 residues or 4 to 20 residues. This information influenced the discrimination of these residues to form transition state structures.

On the other hand, barnase, FK506 binding protein, and IM9 are influenced by surrounding residues, and the discrimination of transition state-forming residues lies in the range of 74–85%. The surrounding residues for the residues with high Φ-values in these proteins are listed in Table 4. The data presented in this table show that the occurrence of surrounding residues is different for different proteins. FK506 binding protein is influenced by hydrophobic residues Leu and Val, whereas 1BNI and 1IMQ are influenced by both hydrophobic and polar residues. Furthermore, the occurrence of individual residues is different in these proteins, The commonly occurring surrounding residues of 1BNI are Lys, Leu, Thr, and Tyr, whereas those of 1IMQ are Glu, Phe, Leu, Gln, and Thr. These similarities and differences influenced the performance of discriminating the residues with high Φ-values.

The comparison of structural parameters for the residues with high and low Φ-values shows the dominance of specific ranges of surrounding hydrophobicity and solvent accessibility as well as specific secondary structures in both positive and negative datasets (Table 1). Hence, the discrimination accuracy is modest with these parameters.

Combination of structure-based parameters and surrounding residues
We combined the structure-based parameters and surrounding residues and analyzed the performance of discrimination. To reduce the number of parameters, the amino acid residues are classified into seven groups and only the normalized contacts are considered. These parameters, along with Hp, ASA, and SS, were used an input for machine learning techniques.

Interestingly, there is no improvement in discrimination accuracy for the six proteins that were discriminated well with either surrounding residues or contacts. This result indicates that these proteins were influenced by either contacts or surrounding residues. On the other hand, other proteins barstar 1BTA), chymotrypsin inhibitor (2CI2), Im7 (1AYI) and spectrin R16 and R17 domains (1CUN) showed significant improvement in prediction accuracy, indicating the importance of both surrounding residues and the medium- and long-range contacts. The rise of discrimination accuracy was up to 24%.

Conclusions
We have systematically analyzed the influence of structural parameters to discriminate the residues that form transition state structures in proteins using experimental Φ-values. Our results showed that few proteins are influenced by surrounding residues, whereas some of them are influenced by the number of contacts at various distances of sequence separation. Interestingly, both factors were found to be important to the formation of transition state structures in specific proteins. The residues with high Φ-values were discriminated with accuracy of 74–95% for individual proteins, and the overall accuracy was 68%. We suggest that, in addition to structure based-parameters, other information on conservation of residues and noncovalent interactions is important for understanding the transition state structures of proteins.
