Revisiting “reverse hydrophobic effect”: Applicable only to coil mutations at the surface

Abstract
In a seminal paper, Pakula and Sauer (Nature, 1990, 344, 363–364) demonstrated that the increase in side‐chain hydrophobicity has a reverse relationship with protein stability. We have addressed this problem with several examples of mutants that span at different locations in protein structure based on secondary structure and solvent accessibility. We confirmed that the stability change upon single coil mutation at exposed region is reversely correlated with hydrophobicity with a single exception. In addition, we found the existence of such relationship in partially buried coil mutants. The stability of exposed helical mutants is governed by conformational properties. In buried and partially buried helical and strand mutants properties reflecting hydrophobicity have direct relationship with stability, whereas an opposite relationship was obtained with entropy and flexibility. The structural analysis of partially buried/exposed mutants showed that the surrounding residues are important for the stability change upon mutation. These results provide insights to understand the general behavior for the stability of proteins upon amino acid substitutions. © 2009 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Biopolymers 91: 591–599, 2009.

INTRODUCTION

The major non‐covalent interactions, namely, hydrophobic, electrostatic, van der Waals and hydrogen bonds play an important role in the stability of protein structures.1 The importance of such interactions for protein stability has been revealed by site‐directed mutagenesis experiments. It is generally accepted that hydrophobicity is a major factor for the stability of buried protein mutants.2, 3 However, the contributions from hydrogen bonds, electrostatic and other interactions are also significant for the stability of partially buried and exposed mutations.3-5 The availability of vast experimental data on protein mutant stability for several proteins and different mutants demands the necessity to carry out a systematic analysis to understand the general mechanism for protein stability, which is an important task in protein engineering.

Several investigations have been carried out to understand the stability of protein mutants and predicting the stability upon amino acid substitutions. In these studies, datasets have been constructed as a mixture of mutants from different proteins in which the experiments have been carried out under different conditions and the mutants are located at different positions in protein structures.6-10 Recently, we showed that the classification of mutants based on solvent accessibility and secondary structure is necessary to understand the mechanism of protein mutant stability.11

Pakula and Sauer12 performed site‐directed mutagenesis experiments on the mutants of Tyr26 in Cro repressor and reported the existence of reverse relationship between amino acid side‐chain hydrophobicity and stability. In this work, we have examined the relationship in a variety of mutants located at different secondary structures and various ranges of solvent accessibility. We have collected the data for the single mutants at specific sites in which experiments have been carried out with the same conditions. We have utilized the thermodynamic database for proteins and mutants, ProTherm13 to obtain the reliable data. We have related the experimental stability with 49 different amino acid properties and revealed the important properties that are determining the stability of protein mutants. We observed that the “reverse hydrophobic effect” is generally suitable to exposed coil mutants. This hypothesis is also applicable to partially exposed/buried coil mutants. Further, important amino acid properties that are major determinants to the stability of protein mutants at different locations in protein structures will be discussed. Our approach showed a general trend for understanding the stability of proteins upon amino acid substitutions.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Database
We have set up the following procedure to obtain the data from ProTherm database: (i) searched for ΔTm for the single mutants at specific site in a protein obtained with same pH and (ii) ΔΔG or ΔΔGH2O obtained with same pH and temperature. In each data set, we removed the duplicate data and considered the sites with at least five mutants. This yielded 55 sets of data in 13 different proteins. The mutational sites have been classified into nine groups on the basis of secondary structure (helix, strand, and coil) and solvent accessibility, SA (buried, SA <5%; partially buried/exposed, 5% < SA <50%; exposed, SA >50%) obtained with DSSP14 and ASC,15 respectively. The details are presented in Tables I and II.

Amino Acid Properties
We used a set of 49 diverse amino acid properties (physical‐chemical, energetic and conformational), which fall into various clusters analyzed by Tommi and Kanehisa16 in the present study. The amino acid properties were normalized between 0 and 1 using the expression, Pnorm(i) = [P(i)−Pmin]/[Pmax−Pmin], where P(i), Pnorm(i) are, respectively, the original and normalized values of amino acid i for aparticular property, and Pmin and Pmax are, respectively, the minimum and maximum values. The numerical and normalized values for all the 49 properties used in this study along with their brief descriptions are available at http://www.cbrc.jp/∼gromiha/fold_rate/property.html. These properties have been used to understand/predict protein folding/unfolding rates, stability of protein mutants, transition state structures, discrimination of membrane proteins etc.3, 17-21

Hydrophobicity Scales
Several hydrophobicity scales have been reported in the literature. Nozaki and Tanford22 developed the first hydrophobicity scale using the free energies of transfer of amino acids from water to ethanol. Cornette et al.23 compared 38 hydrophobicity scales and showed that “surrounding hydrophobicity” is one of the strongest scales to identify the characteristic period of α‐helices in proteins. It characterizes the hydrophobic behavior of residues in protein environment. The surrounding hydrophobicity of residue k in a protein is the sum of the experimental hydrophobicities22, 24 of all the other residues in the protein, whose Cα atoms are within the limit of 8 Å. The average value for each residue in a set of proteins is termed as “surrounding hydrophobicity scale.”25 We have used both the scales along with two others in the present work.

DeVido et al.26 developed a hydrophobicity scale based on the partition coefficients of the 20 amino acids as a function of the surface bonding density of alkyl chains using reverse‐phase liquid chromatography (RPLC). They showed that their polarity scale correlates better with other chromatographic scales than those based on other methods. The octanol/water based scales correlated well and other scales are poorly correlated with RPLC data.26 Further, the hydrophobicity scales derived with different methods and type of the solute showed the correlation (r) in the range of 0.50–0.81 and 0.71–0.88, respectively.26 This shows the consistency among different hydrophobicity scales.

Reduced Set of Amino Acid Properties
We have also used a reduced set of six amino acid properties. This has been obtained with the following procedure: we have computed the cross correlation coefficients between all possible combinations of 49 amino acid properties and retained only one property if it shows the correlation of more than 0.65 with any of the other properties. This procedure has resulted in a set of 15 properties. Further, we noticed the presence of two properties with similar behavior. This subjective analysis helped to omit nine more properties and we derived the final set of six properties (Ht: thermodynamic transfer hydrophobicity; pHi: isoelectric point; Esm: short and medium‐range non‐bonded energy; Pα: α‐helical tendency; Nl: number of long‐range contacts and −TΔS: unfolding entropy change). In this work, we have used both sets of 49 and six properties.

Computational Procedure
We compute the changes in property values due to mutations, ΔP(i), using the equation:


where, Pmut(i) and Pwild(i), are, respectively, the property value of the ith mutant and wild type residue. i vary from 1 to N, N being the total number of mutants. The computed difference of property values (ΔP) are related to the changes in experimental stability values using correlation coefficient. The statistical significance of the results obtained in the present study has been verified with t‐test and P‐values. The correlation coefficients, t‐test and P‐values were determined by standard procedures.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
Reverse Hydrophobic Effect
We have analyzed the reverse hydrophobic effect on 15 sets of data at six unique mutant sites in various proteins. These mutants are located on the surface of their respective proteins and have coil conformation. The results are presented in Table I. We found that the properties reflecting hydrophobicity have negative correlation with stability (ΔTm/ΔΔG/ΔΔGH2O) in 13 datasets. The chromatography index (Rf, the characteristic migration rate in a solvent‐absorbent system) showed the highest negative correlation with the stability of exposed coil mutants in three of the six unique mutants. It has been reported that Rf is a hydrophobic related property and it showed the highest positive correlation with the stability of buried protein mutants.27 Other properties that showed negative correlation with stability are number of long‐range contacts, free energy of hydration, β‐strand tendency etc. The correlation varies in the range of −0.74 to −0.98 and a typical example is shown in Figure 1. The replacement of Lys15 located at the surface of bovine trypsin inhibitor (1BPI) with 17 other amino acid residues showed a correlation of −0.73 between free energy change and thermodynamic transfer hydrophobicity (Ht) with the P‐value of <0.001. We noticed that the substitution of K15H stabilized the protein with the free‐energy change of 1 kcal/mol, which is far away from the regression line (see Figure 1). The elimination of His improved the correlation to −0.86 as reported with other hydrophobicity scales.28 In Cro protein Rf showed the highest negative correlation of −0.91 with free energy change whereas the correlation is −0.80 with thermodynamic transfer hydrophobicity. The only exception is the mutation of V74 in human lysozyme in which the mutation is attributed to hydration effects29 and we obtained a positive correlation between hydrophobicity and stability.

In Table I, we have also included the results obtained with coil mutations at partially exposed regions. The hydrophobic properties show a negative correlation with stability indicating the applicability of “reverse hydrophobic effect” also in partially buried coil mutants. It has been observed with different hydrophobicity scales, such as thermodynamic transfer hydrophobicity,22 normalized consensus hydrophobicity30 as well the combined surrounding hydrophobicity scale derived for globular and membrane proteins.31 We noticed that the correlation coefficient is higher for exposed mutations compared with partially buried mutants in several cases. In addition, entropy is showing positive correlation with the stability. The relationship between thermodynamic transfer hydrophobicity and stability change due to the mutation of Thr157 in T4 lysozyme to 13 amino acid residues is shown in Figure 2. We observed that the correlation between them is −0.81 and the P‐value is less than 0.001.

The conformational properties and thermodynamic properties are dominant for attributing the stability of coil mutants in the interior of proteins. Our analysis showed a good correlation between the free energy change of hydration and stability change due to buried coil mutation.

Physical Basis for the “Reverse Hydrophobic Effect”
The present analysis on various proteins confirmed that the stability of a protein can be increased by amino acid substitutions with decreasing side‐chain hydrophobicity at exposed coil positions. This reverse correlation between hydrophobicity and stability was earlier termed as “inverse hydrophobic effect.”12 The physical basis for this effect has been interpreted as the amino acid residue is more exposed to water in the folded state than in the unfolded state.12 Further, Shortle et al.32 developed an explicit chain lattice model to understand the “inverse hydrophobic effect” and explored that the effect can arise from greater burial of nonpolar surface in the denatured state than in the native state.

Recently, Zarrine‐Afsar et al.33 combined both experimental and theoretical approaches to demonstrate the importance of nonnative interactions to protein folding. They have developed a continuum coarse‐grained chain model with a native centric potential augmented by sequence‐dependent hydrophobic interactions to address the energetics and position specificity of nonnative hydrophobic interactions. Remarkably, the substitutions of large hydrophobic residues at Asn53 in Fyn SH3 domain accelerated the folding rate of the domain. Further, the free energy ΔΔG‡‐u showed a correlation of 0.75 with changes in side‐chain hydrophobicity. These results confirmed the existence of nonnative interactions in the folding transition state and the “inverse hydrophobic effect” arises mainly from such interactions.

Helical Mutations
We have classified the mutations in helical segments into three groups, viz. exposed, partially exposed/buried and buried, and analyzed the influence of important properties for stability. In exposed mutations, conformational properties are dominant for the stability of mutants. The coil propensity showed negative correlation and the propensity of residues at the N‐ and C‐terminus of α‐helices showed positive correlation with stability. The number of medium‐range contacts also showed positive correlation with the stability of protein mutants. This might be due to the fact that α‐helices are mainly formed with medium‐range contacts. Further, we noticed that the correlation coefficient varies in the range of 0.58–0.72 in various mutants.

In partially exposed/buried mutations the conformational properties as well as hydrophobicity showed strong correlation with protein mutant stability. In addition, hydration free energy of denatured protein also showed positive correlation with stability. In Figure 3, we display the variation of propensity at N‐terminal of α‐helices with the stability change due to the mutation of D134 in ribonuclease H (2RN2). There is a good correlation between them and the r‐value is 0.89. The t‐test and P‐values are 5.609 and <0.0016, respectively. Similar correlation is observed with other characteristics of helical segments such as α‐helical propensity, number of medium‐range contacts etc.

In buried mutations, we observed a direct relationship between hydrophobicity and stability whereas there is a reverse relationship between stability and entropy/flexibility (Table I). This result indicates the importance of packing for the stability of helical mutants in buried positions. The relationship between surrounding hydrophobicity and free‐energy change for the mutation of Ala52 to 17 other amino acid residues is shown in Figure 4. We observed that the correlation coefficient is 0.78 (t‐test: 4.798 and P‐value: <0.0004) and four residues Lys, His, Gly and Tyr are deviated from the regression line. These mutants significantly destabilize the protein and it might be due to the introduction of an aromatic or ionized group into the cavity, which alters the protein conformation.34 The elimination of these residues enhanced the correlation up to 0.98, showing the important contribution of hydrophobicity for the stability of buried helical mutants.

Mutations in β‐Strands
In exposed mutations, the properties related with long‐range interactions and hydrophobicity showed strong correlation with stability. In addition, there is a reverse relationship between turn tendency and the stability change of exposed strand mutants. In partially exposed/buried mutations the properties reflecting long‐range interactions (number of long‐range contacts, β‐strand propensity, bulkiness) showed good correlation (r = 0.69–0.76) with stability.

In buried mutations, the stability is mainly attributed to hydrophobicity. Further, the conformational properties are found to be important for stability. The turn tendency shows a strong reverse relationship with stability as in the case of exposed strand mutants. The reverse relationship between turn tendency and the stability change due to the replacement of Ile59 in human lysozyme with nine other amino acids is shown in Figure 5. We observed that almost all the mutants fit well and the correlation coefficient is −0.91 (P‐value: < 0.002). Further, the direct relationship between Hnc and ΔΔGH2O for the mutation of Glu49 in tryptophan synthase is revealed in Figure 6 and the correlation coefficient is 0.99. The t‐test and P‐values are 10.58 and <0.0018, respectively.

Influence of Nonnative Secondary Structure Propensity in Protein Folding
Di Nardo et al.35 analyzed the mutants of Gly48 in Src 3 domain and showed that the accelerated folding rates of Gly48 mutants are the result of stabilization of a nonnative β‐strand conformation in the transition state structure at this position. In the transition state only one β‐sheet is well formed and as Gly is unfavorable to β‐strand conformation the substitutions at Gly48 stabilize the β‐strand conformation. They have also confirmed that the stability is highly correlated with β‐strand propensity.36 These results show that the folding is accelerated by the stabilization of a nonnative backbone conformation in the folding transition state. Further, the stability is attributed with β‐strand propensity and volume. Interestingly, the present results also showed similar trends to protein mutant stability.

Zarrine‐Afsar et al.33 addressed the role of secondary structure and hydrophobicity to protein folding using Asn53 mutants located in an exposed 310‐helix of Fyn SH3 domain. They showed that the replacement of Asn53 with other residues increases the folding rates with increase in hydrophobicity. As Asn53 is located in the middle of a 310‐helix and at surface they suggested that the nonnative interactions are responsible for this phenomenon. Further, the increase in hydrophobic strength is attributed with the contact between Asn53 and other residues in β‐strand regions in the transition state, which are absent in native state. These results suggest that the specific nonnative interactions and nonnative secondary structure propensity play an important role to protein folding.

Analysis on Interacting Residues of Partially Exposed/Buried Strand and Coil Mutants
We have analyzed the influence of protein stability due to the substitutions at partially exposed/buried coil and strand regions using the information about the interactions between mutated and other residues in protein structures. The contacting residues within the distance of 8 Å for four specific partially exposed/buried coil and strand mutants are listed in Table III. Interestingly, the mutants T157 in 2LZM have only two long‐range contacts (sequence separation is more than four residues37) and T26 in 1BNI mainly contact with polar residues. These residues may form hydrogen bonds to stabilize the structure4 rather than hydrophobic interactions, which was reflected in the analysis with amino acid properties. We found an inverse relationship between hydrophobicity and protein mutant stability, which shows that the substitutions with hydrophobic residues destabilize the structure.

On the other hand, the residues T53 in 1PGA and D79 in 1RGG are surrounded with mainly hydrophobic/β‐strand forming residues, which indicate the importance of hydrophobic interactions and tendency of forming β‐strands to protein mutant stability.38 Our analysis with amino acid properties also showed a high positive correlation between long‐range contacts/hydrophobicity/β‐strand tendency and protein mutant stability (Tables I and II).

We infer from this analysis that the stability of proteins upon partially exposed/buried coil and strand mutants mainly depend on the network of interactions with other residues in protein structures.

Amino Acid Properties and Random Numbers
The correlations between amino acid properties and experimental stability changes showed the importance of specific amino acid properties for the stability of protein mutants. The absolute correlation coefficients lie in the range of 0.60–0.99 (Table I). In contrast, when we generated 49 sets of random numbers, normalized them to the amino acid properties and the computed the correlation coefficients between the random numbers and the experimental stability changes (ΔTm/ΔΔG/ΔΔGH2O) for all the datasets, the average correlation coefficient fell within a range between 0.18 ± 0.14 and 0.42 ± 0.27. This verifies that we could clearly discriminate between amino acid properties and random values and emphasizes the validity of selecting various amino acid properties.

Correlation Between Selected Amino Acid Properties and Protein Mutant Stability
We have used a set of six amino acid properties with different characteristics and computed the correlation with the stability of protein mutants. The results are presented in Table II. We noticed that the results are similar to those obtained with 49 amino acid properties, which strengthened our conclusions.

In exposed coil mutations, we found the “reverse hydrophobic effect” in all the considered mutants except for V74 in 1LZ1 as obtained with a set of 49 amino acid properties. The thermodynamic transfer hydrophobicity22 showed the correlation in the range of −0.57 to −0.80. The partially buried coil mutants showed a reverse correlation with hydrophobicity and number of long‐range contacts. In addition, we obtained a direct correlation between stability and pHi as well as ‐TΔS in buried coil mutations.

On the other hand, there is no relationship between hydrophobicity and stability in exposed helical mutations. Further, we did not find a uniform relationship with any of the properties. The stability is mainly governed with α‐helical tendency and entropy. The short and medium‐range energy showed a direct relationship with the stability of buried helical mutants.

In strand mutations, we found a direct relationship between hydrophobicity and stability. Further, the number of long‐range contacts also showed a positive correlation with stability. These observations are similar to that obtained with 49 amino acid properties.

CONCLUSIONS
We have systematically analyzed the influence of different amino acid properties for the stability of protein mutants based on their locations in terms of secondary structure and solvent accessibility. We confirmed that the “reverse hydrophobic effect” proposed earlier with the mutation of Tyr26 in Cro generally works well to coil mutations at the surface. In addition, this hypothesis is also applicable to partially buried exposed/buried coil mutations. The strand mutants are mainly attributed to hydrophobic/long‐range interactions as well as negative influence of turn tendency. The conformational properties play a major role in the stability of helical mutants along with hydrophobicity. This analysis reveals the importance of amino acid properties to the stability of protein mutants for the replacement of specific residues with other amino acid residues.