Influence of DNA stiffness in protein–DNA recognition

Abstract
Protein–DNA recognition plays an essential role in the regulation of gene expression. The protein–DNA binding specificity is based on direct atomic contacts between protein and DNA and/or the conformational properties of DNA. In this work, we have analyzed the influence of DNA stiffness (E) to the specificity of protein–DNA complexes. The average DNA stiffness parameters for several protein–DNA complexes have been computed using the structure based sequence dependent stiffness scale. The relationship between DNA stiffness and experimental protein–DNA binding specificity has been brought out. We have investigated the importance of DNA stiffness with the aid of experimental free energy changes (ΔΔG) due to binding in several protein–DNA complexes, such as, ETS proteins, 434, λ, Mnt and trp repressors, 434 cro protein, EcoRV endonuclease V and zinc fingers. We found a correlation in the range 0.65–0.97 between ΔΔG and E in these examples. Further, we have qualitatively analyzed the effect of mutations in the target sequence of λ repressor and we observed that the DNA stiffness could correctly identify 70% of the correct bases among the considered nine positions.

Keywords
DNA stiffness Protein–DNA recognition Free energy change Binding specificity

1. Introduction
Protein–DNA interactions play a key role in many vital processes, including regulation of gene expression, DNA replication and repair, and packaging. The remarkable specificity with which proteins recognize target DNA sequences is of considerable theoretical and practical importance, and its basis has been demonstrated through structural analysis of large number of protein–DNA complexes (Mandel-Gutfreund and Margalit, 1998, Nadassy et al., 1999, Jones et al., 1999, Luscombe and Thornton, 2002). On the other hand, several experiments have been performed to understand the mechanism of protein–DNA recognition (Koudelka et al., 1987, Sarai and Takeda, 1989, Martin et al., 1999, Grillo et al., 1999, Poon and Macgregor, 2004). These studies inferred that the protein–DNA binding specificity mainly depends on two factors: (i) the contacts between amino acids and base pairs either directly (via hydrogen bonding, van der waals, electrostatic interactions, etc.) or through water molecules (Schwabe, 1997, Kono and Sarai, 1999) and/or (ii) the conformational changes in the DNA, such as, bending, flexibility (Hogan and Austin, 1987, Sarai et al., 1989, Harrington and Winicov, 1994, Olson et al., 1998), etc.

Recently, we have systematically analyzed the contributions of inter and intra-molecular interactions to protein–DNA recognition using a structural database containing many protein–DNA complexes and showed that both inter and intra-molecular readouts contribute to the specificity of protein–DNA recognition, and their relative contributions vary depending upon the protein–DNA complexes (Gromiha et al., 2004). However, the conformational changes of DNA have significantly contributed to the specificity of protein–DNA recognition in more than 95% of the considered protein–DNA complexes. From the analysis on 434 repressor, Hogan and Austin (1987) reported that the elastic properties of DNA may be an important factor for protein–DNA binding specificity. Further, the significance of these elastic properties of DNA has been extensively reviewed with an application to protein–DNA recognition (Hagerman, 1988, Harrington, 1992, Strick et al., 2000, Travers and Thompson, 2004, Olson et al., 2004).

In our earlier work, we have developed sequence dependent stiffness scales for trinucleotides indirectly from the experimental flexibility data (Gromiha et al., 1996) and directly from the three-dimensional structures of DNA molecules (Gromiha, 2000). These stiffness scales have been successfully used to (i) establish a relationship with base-stacking energy, (ii) understand the mechanism of cro protein–DNA interactions, (iii) study the nucleic acid dynamics, (iv) estimate the height of DNA and (v) to solve the boundary value problem for finite Kirchhoff rods (Gromiha et al., 1996, Gromiha et al., 1997, Gromiha, 2000, Starikov, 2002, Moreno-Herrero et al., 2003, da Fonseca and de Aguiar, 2003).

In this work, we have analyzed the influence of DNA stiffness to protein–DNA binding specificity with several examples. We have computed the average stiffness of DNA using the structure based sequence dependent stiffness scale. These average stiffness values obtained with the target sequences of protein–DNA complexes have been related with experimental protein–DNA binding specificity. We observed the correlations in the range of 0.65–0.97 between DNA stiffness and binding free energy change in several protein–DNA complexes. Further, we have computed the DNA stiffness change due to systematic mutations in target sequence and observed that DNA stiffness could correctly identify most of the bases in the target sequences of DNA–protein complexes. These results reveal the influence of DNA stiffness to protein–DNA binding specificity. In addition, the direct contacts between protein and DNA through hydrogen bonds and electrostatic and other interactions are also important for understanding the mechanism of protein–DNA recognition.

2. Materials and methods
2.1. Sequence dependent stiffness scale for trinucleotides
We have developed the sequence dependent stiffness scale for trinucleotides using the crystallographic data of 70 DNA molecules (Gromiha, 2000). The numerical values for all the 32 trinucleotide units are given in Table 1. This structure based stiffness scale has been effectively used for understanding the dynamics of nucleic acid structures, solving the boundary value problem in elastic rods and for predicting the stability of DNA duplexes (Starikov, 2002, Moreno-Herrero et al., 2003, da Fonseca and de Aguiar, 2003, Sundaralingam and Ponnuswamy, 2004). We have used the same scale for understanding the role of DNA stiffness to protein–DNA binding specificity in this study.

2.2. Computation of average DNA stiffness value and correlation coefficient
Each DNA sequence has been represented by overlapping segments of trinucleotide units. The stiffness values for each trinucleotide was assigned appropriately from the structure based stiffness scale (Table 1) and the average Young's modulus was computed using the equation.
where Ei is the Young's modulus for the ith trinucleotide and n is the total number of trinucleotide units.

The correlation coefficient between average stiffness (E) and protein–DNA binding specificity was computed using the familiar formula:
where r is the correlation coefficient, N, X and Y are, respectively, the number of data, average stiffness values and experimental protein–DNA binding data.

2.3. DNA Z-score and bending angle
The DNA Z-score has been computed using the conformational parameters of DNA, such as, shift, slide, rise, tilt, roll and twist and the computational details have been explained in our earlier article (Gromiha et al., 2004). The numerical values and the information about the bending angle of DNA in protein–DNA complexes have been obtained from the helix and bending analysis of nucleic acid double helix structures available at http://www.imb-jena.de/Piet/html/.

2.4. Experimental protein–DNA binding specificity
We have collected the information about the experimental protein–DNA binding specificity data from the literature as well as those available in ProNIT, thermodynamic database for protein–nucleic acid interactions database (Prabakaran et al., 2001). The detailed analyses have been made with the protein–DNA complexes, ETS proteins, 434, λ, Mnt and trp repressors, cro protein, EcoRV endonuclease V and zinc finger proteins. These complexes were selected as they have large bending angle and high DNA Z-score along with experimental binding data.

3. Results and discussions
We have analyzed the influence of DNA stiffness to protein–DNA binding specificity for several protein–DNA complexes that have high DNA bending, Z-score and known experimental binding data.

3.1. ETS proteins
Szymczyna and Arrowsmith (2000) measured the binding affinity between ETS family proteins and various DNAs containing mutations in their flanking regions outside the core GGA trinucleotide sequence (ACCGGAAGT). They concluded that the recognition mechanism used by ETS proteins is partially governed by indirect readout. Further, the DNA Z-scores is reported to be −3.1 for SAP-1 ETS complex, 1HBX (Gromiha et al., 2004). We have calculated the average DNA stiffness for all the six sequences, where the binding free energy is known and the results are plotted in Fig. 1. We found an excellent relationship between DNA stiffness and binding free energy change and the correlation is 0.97. Interestingly, the two DNA sequences (AAAACGGGAAGTGGG and AAAAGGGGAAGTGGG) with relatively high DNA stiffness are experimentally observed to have significant change in their binding free energies (2.4 and 2.6 kcal/mol, respectively) with ETS proteins. This result indicates that DNA stiffness is important for protein–DNA binding specificity of ETS proteins and the stiffest sequences have the lowest possibility of binding. The structural analysis of SAP-1 ETS complex showed that the recognition is mainly governed by the conformational properties of DNA (Z-score = −3.1) and the influence of direct interactions between protein and DNA is minimal, Z-score = −0.5 (Gromiha et al., 2004). Hence, the highest correlation obtained between DNA stiffness and binding free energy change might be due to the major role played by indirect readout as evidenced from DNA binding specificity experiments (Szymczyna and Arrowsmith, 2000).

Poon and Macgregor (2004) investigated the thermodynamic basis of DNA sequence selectivity of Murine PU.1 ETS complex using different salt concentrations and at various temperatures. The dissociation constant and heat capacity changes of five sequences reported in their study at 0 °C with the salt concentration of 150 mM NaCl is presented in Table 2. The DNA Z-score of this complex (1PUE) is −2.7 and the bending angle is 39°. We have calculated the DNA stiffness for all these sequences and the results are included in Table 2. We found a good linear relationship between DNA stiffness and KD. Similar relation is also observed with ΔCp. The correlation coefficient obtained with KD and ΔCp are, respectively, 0.89 and 0.92.

3.2. Repressors
The high-resolution structure of the phage 434 repressor shows that tight, local interactions are made at the end of the binding site, causing the central base pairs to become bent and overtwisted. The centre of the operator is not in contact with protein but repressor affinity can be reduced at least 50-fold in response to a sequence change there (Koudelka et al., 1987). We have calculated the DNA stiffness for 10 different operators and the results are presented in Table 3. The experimental affinity changes are also included in this table. We found that the mutated sequences (ACAATACGTATTGT and ACAATAGCTATTGT) that reduced 50-fold affinity are the two stiffest sequences. The correlation between DNA stiffness and binding affinity for the 10 operators is 0.77. Further, we have analyzed the relationship between DNA stiffness and binding affinity change at the amino terminal domain (1–69) of 434 repressor for 10 synthetic operators (Koudelka et al., 1987). We noticed a good relationship between them and the correlation coefficient is 0.75. The three-dimensional structure of 434 repressor complex shows the presence of several hydrogen bonds, van der Waals contacts and electrostatic interactions between protein and DNA (Rodgers and Harrison, 1993) and these contacts play a major role to protein–DNA recognition (Gromiha et al., 2004). We infer from these observations that the DNA stiffness parameters as well as the direct contacts between protein and DNA through hydrogen bonds and electrostatic interactions are important for the recognition of 434 repressor with DNA.

The λ repressor shows the highest DNA Z-score among the considered 62 protein–DNA complexes (Gromiha et al., 2004). Sarai and Takeda (1989) experimentally measured the binding affinity changes for six operators and the base substitutions in OR1 operator. We have calculated the DNA stiffness for all the operators and related with their respective experimental binding free energy changes. Our result agrees well with five operators except OR3 and the correlation is 0.92. The correlation is reduced to 0.65 when we include this operator. We observed similar level of relationship between E and ΔΔG for the mutations in OR1 operator.

Grillo et al. (1999) measured the experimental binding free energy changes in trp repressor mutants. We have calculated the DNA stiffness for all the four mutants reported in this study and related with ΔΔG. We observed a correlation of 0.73 between E and ΔΔG. Otwinowski et al. (1988) reported that the trp repressor–operator complex contains 14 direct hydrogen bonds between the repressor and operator, 6 solvent mediated contacts and several non-polar contacts. Further, it has been mentioned that the electrostatic field effects contribute significantly to the interaction between trp repressor and DNA. Hence, the moderate correlation obtained between DNA stiffness and binding free energy change of trp repressor might be due to the dominance of hydrogen bonds, van der Waals and electrostatic interactions between protein and DNA for protein–DNA recognition.

Recently, Man et al. (2004) determined the binding specificities of Mnt repressor with operator mutants (ATAGGTCCACGGTGGACCTGT) at positions A16 and C17 using multiple fluorescence binding assay experiments. This study has been carried out with 11 Mnt repressor mutants and they reported that most of the variant proteins prefer T and A, respectively at positions 16 and 17. We have computed the DNA stiffness for all possible nucleotides at positions 16 and 17 (16 substitutions) by mutating all the 4 bases (A, T, C and G) at these positions and the results are presented in Table 4. We observed that the sequence with T16 and A17 has the lowest stiffness value indicating that this sequence has the highest affinity for binding, as observed in experiments (Man et al., 2004). In Table 4, we also listed the relative affinity of one of the variants of Mnt repressor (H6Q) for all the substitutions at positions 16 and 17. We noticed that the sequences with A16 and T17, and T16 and T17 have low stiffness values although the affinity is low. The correlation between DNA stiffness and binding affinity of 14 other substitutions is 0.81.

3.3. 434 Cro protein
Koudelka et al. (1987) measured the affinity of 434 cro protein with a series of mutant operators and reported that the relative affinity is reduced 17 times by the substitution of two nucleotides at positions 7 and 8 of 14-mer synthetic operator, ACAATATATATTGT (T7C and A8G, and T7G and A8C). We have calculated the stiffness of all the nine operators and the results are presented in Table 5. We observed that these two sequences are the stiffest ones among all the considered operators and the correlation between DNA stiffness and binding affinity for the nine operators is 0.72.

3.4. EcoRV endonuclease
In EcoRV, the central TA base step of the target DNA sequence, GATATC, exhibits a sharp (50°) bent into the major groove. Martin et al. (1999) introduced base mutations and base analogs in these bases and dissected the structural and energetic origins of indirect readout in site-specific DNA cleavage by EcoRV. Their analysis showed that indirect readout provides 6–10 kcal/mol toward catalytic specificity. We have examined all possible base substitutions at those two positions and estimated the DNA stiffness values. As the experimental binding free energies are available only for two substitutions we did not calculate the correlation. However, we found that the DNA stiffness is the lowest for the target sequence. Upon substitution of TA with CG, the DNA becomes two times stiffer than the target sequence and the stiffest one among all possible 16 substitutions. The change of binding free energy is also the highest for the sequence replaced TA with CG. This result indicates the importance of DNA stiffness to understand the protein–DNA binding specificity.

3.5. Zinc fingers
The Cys2His2 zinc finger family is the best-studied eukaryotic family of transcription factors for understanding protein–DNA recognition mechanism (Koizumi et al., 2000, Miller and Pabo, 2001, Kono and Sarai, 1999, Benos et al., 2002). The specificity of DNA sequence recognition by zinc fingers has been well explained by direct readout (Kono and Sarai, 1999) and the substantial contribution of indirect readout have also been revealed (Gromiha et al., 2004). Miller and Pabo (2001) measured the dissociation constants for the binding of Zif268 with seven DNA sequences. Benos et al. (2002) proposed a probability recognition code method to predict the binding affinity of zinc finger–DNA recognition and reported a correlation of 0.93 with experimental KD values (Miller and Pabo, 2001). We have computed the DNA stiffness for all those seven sequences and the results are presented in Table 6. We observed an excellent correlation between DNA stiffness and dissociation constant and the r-value is 0.95.

3.6. Qualitative analysis on the effect of mutations in the target sequence of λ repressor
Sarai and Takeda (1989) measured the binding free energy changes for the mutations in the consensus sequence of λ operator using filter binding assay. We have calculated the DNA stiffness for all possible mutations at each site and the results are presented in Table 7. We found that in six of the nine positions, the target sequence has the lowest DNA stiffness, showing a fairly good agreement with experiment.

We have further analyzed the contacts between amino acids and bases in the crystal structure of λ operator–DNA complex (1LMB) and we observed that in two of the three missed positions, the bases are in close contact with amino acid residues and the distance is less than 3 Å. Hence, these positions may be influenced by the direct readout, via hydrogen bonds, van der Waals and electrostatic interactions, and the role of DNA is marginal; it has also been shown that the energy due to base–amino acid interaction (direct readout) is the lowest at these positions (Gromiha et al., 2004). In general, the DNA stiffness thus predicts correct targets (wild type) against incorrect ones (mutants) quite well.

3.7. Comparative analysis on the contribution of DNA stiffness to the binding affinity among protein families
In ETS family of proteins, we observed an excellent correlation between DNA stiffness and binding free energy change of SAP-1 ETS complex. The Murine PU.1 ETS complex, belonging to this family, also showed a strong correlation between DNA stiffness and KD (and ΔCp). These results are supported by the experimental observation that ETS proteins are partially governed by indirect readout mechanism (Szymczyna and Arrowsmith, 2000). The repressors show moderate correlation between DNA stiffness and binding affinity (r-values are 0.77, 0.75, 0.81 and 0.73, respectively, for 434, amino terminal domain of 434, Mnt and trp repressors). In λ repressor, less stiffness of the operator OR3 reduced the correlation from 0.92 to 0.65 between E and ΔΔG. 434 cro has the correlation of 0.72 with relative binding affinity. Further, DNA stiffness has a strong correlation with the binding specificity of zinc finger proteins.

3.8. Implications for the mechanism of protein–DNA recognition
The analysis on the relationship between DNA stiffness and protein–DNA binding specificity in several protein–DNA complexes indicates the presence of a strong correlation between them, in the range of 0.65–0.97. The recognition of proteins with DNA is mainly based on: (i) the direct contacts between protein and DNA via hydrogen bonds, van der Waals, electrostatic interactions, etc. (inter-molecular interactions) and (ii) the conformational properties of DNA (intra-molecular interactions). The protein–DNA complexes that are governed mainly by indirect readout mechanism (e.g. ETS proteins) have major role on the conformational properties of DNA for recognition. In ETS proteins, we observed an excellent correlation between DNA stiffness and binding free energy change, which indicates that the DNA parameters have a significant role for recognition, as observed in experiments (Szymczyna and Arrowsmith, 2000). On the other hand, the analysis on the three-dimensional structures of several protein–DNA complexes (e.g. trp repressor, 434 repressor, etc.) revealed the presence of many direct contacts between protein and DNA through hydrogen bonding, van der Waals and electrostatic interactions. The correlation between DNA stiffness and binding affinity of these complexes are rather modest indicating the major role played by these inter-molecular interactions along with DNA parameters for understanding the mechanism of protein–DNA recognition. In essence, the elastic properties of DNA as well as the hydrogen bonds, van der Waals, electrostatic and other interactions are important for protein–DNA recognition.

4. Conclusions
We have analyzed the importance of DNA stiffness to protein–DNA recognition by comparing the stiffness parameters with protein–DNA binding specificity data. The DNA stiffness of several protein–DNA complex structures has been computed using the sequence dependent structure based stiffness scale. These stiffness values have been related with binding free energy change of 434, λ and trp repressors, ETS proteins and zinc fingers. We observed a good relationship between E and ΔΔG and the correlation is in the range of 0.65–0.97, indicating the importance of DNA stiffness for protein–DNA binding specificity. Further, we have analyzed the effect of DNA stiffness due to mutations in the target sequence of λ repressor and observed that the DNA stiffness could correctly identify most of the positions in the target sequence with lowest E-values.