Genomic variations on a CoA biosynthetic theme

A unique heterotrimeric assembly of individually inactive paralogs, two of which are also involved in regulating phosphatase activity, creates one of the key enzymes of coenzyme A biosynthesis in yeast, pointing to the possibility of a previously undescribed cross-talk between metabolic and signaling pathways.

An ability to reconstruct the metabolic networks of an organism from its genome sequence is one of the key accomplishments of comparative genomics. Indeed, comparative genome analysis of multiple diverse species has confirmed a high degree of conservation of core metabolic machinery. At the same time it has also revealed remarkable variations, such as alternative routes for the same biochemical transformation and alternative genes encoding the same function in different species. Conservation and interspecies variations in the biosynthesis of coenzyme A (CoA), an indispensable acylation cofactor involved in dozens of reactions across all life forms, vividly illustrate these trends1,2. This important pathway has been brought again to the spotlight by Ruiz et al.3, who report surprising findings about one of the key enzymes of yeast CoA biosynthesis—a heterotrimeric phosphopantothenoylcysteine decarboxylase (PPCDC)—thus providing us with a remarkable example of organism-specific pathway variations enhancing the diversity of species.

An emerging picture of pathway variations over hundreds of genomes suggests that the observed metabolic diversity of species is produced by a combinatorial explosion of a limited number of basic metabolic modules. This indicates that genomics-based metabolic reconstruction is a tractable task that requires systematic mapping of a large (but finite!) number of major pathway variants4. The CoA assembly line is composed of two modules: de novo biosynthesis of panto-thenate (vitamin B5) and its downstream five-step conversion to CoA (Fig. 1). The presence of the de novo module (as in Escherichia coli and yeast) or its absence (as in humans or streptococci) is one of the most common variations and determines whether an organism requires pantothenate for growth. Truncated variants of the downstream pathway are found in some bacteria, whereas other deviations include a recent discovery in Archaea where the order of two consecutive transformations from pantoate to phosphopantothenate is swapped compared to Bacteria and Eukarya5. Nonorthologous gene replacements are observed for three of the five enzymatic steps of the downstream pathway. The first of these enzymes, pantothenate kinase, is found in as many as three distinct flavors: PANK-I and PANK-III in Bacteria and PANK-II in Eukarya.

The impact of genomics on understanding of CoA biosynthesis is illustrated by the fact that genes encoding enzymes for the last four steps of the downstream pathway were identified only after the release of the first sequenced genomes. Using genomics-based identification, Strauss et al. experimentally characterized the bacterial phosphopanto-thenoylcysteine synthetase (PPCS)6 as one of the two domains of the bifunctional fusion protein PPCS-PPCDC. This discovery enabled identification of the PPCS in humans and other eukaryotes, where this enzyme and PPCDC are encoded by distinct genes. Similarly, the existence of a human fusion protein with one of the domains homologous to bacterial dephospho-CoA kinase (DPCK) led to identification of the second domain as an alternative form of phosphopantetheine adenylyltransferase (PPAT II) in Eukarya and Archaea7.

In spite of this surge of findings, the CoA biosynthetic pathway in yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) still held an intriguing mystery relating to the PPCDC-catalyzed reaction in this organism. Homology analysis suggested that this role could be fulfilled by any one of three paralogous proteins: Hal3, Vhs3 or Ykl088w. Interestingly, the former two proteins have been shown to act as inhibitors of the serine/threonine protein phosphatase Ppz1, while little was known about the latter protein except that it is essential. However, no studies to date had demonstrated experimentally a role for any of these proteins in CoA biosynthesis. The answer, described by Ruiz et al.3, turned out to be even more interesting than expected. Individually the three candidate proteins have no PPCDC activity, but when they are combined in an unprecedented heterotrimeric assembly they form the functionally active PPCDC enzyme. This discovery was made by two research teams historically focusing on seemingly unrelated pathways—Strauss and colleagues on CoA biosynthesis and Ruiz and colleagues on Ppz-mediated signaling—that have been brought together by this unique intersection in one set of proteins. In this combined study, the authors used an elegant combination of bioinformatics, genetic complementation studies and activity analyses of native and mutant proteins to reach their conclusions. They found that, as for other eukaryotic PPCDCs, the active site is formed at the interface of adjacent monomers in a trimeric structure, with each monomer separately providing two essential catalytic residues from opposite sides of the active site. However, unlike other PPCDCs, each of the Hal3, Vhs3 and Ykl088w proteins has only one of these residues, and they have to combine in a trimeric assembly to form a single active site. A particularly exciting ultimate experiment demonstrates that when the Ykl088w protein is reengineered to equip it with the second active site residue, the resulting chimeric protein reconstitutes a homotrimeric PPCDC that is active in vitro and in vivo.

Conservation of similar obligatory heteromeric PPDCs with Ppz1 inhibitory domains in several other fungal genomes points to a possible physiologically relevant connection between CoA metabolism and Ppz1-mediated cellular pathways, such as halotolerance and cell cycle progression. For instance, the involvement of proteins in one of the pathways may affect or regulate the other. Although this conjecture may seem far-fetched, more and more examples of interactions between metabolic and signaling pathways in eukaryotic cells are becoming available. Among the most prominent is the cross-talk between metabolism of NAD cofactors and various regulatory programs mediated by NAD-dependent protein deacetylases (sirtuins). In the context of CoA metabolism, it is tempting to draw analogies from a recent report about the involvement of PPCDC (Hal3) in light-dependent regulation of cell division in rice8. Thus, the current study of Ruiz et al.3 may be considered a first step toward filling in the gaps in our knowledge of regulatory associations between CoA biosynthesis and signaling pathways in yeast.
