Comparative Approach to Analysis of Gene Essentiality

Abstract
A collection of chapters assembled in this volume provides an illustration of remarkable technological progress in genome-scale essentiality analysis in a variety of microbial species. In accord with other genomic techniques, one may anticipate that the volume of essentiality data will continue to grow at an accelerated pace as the technology becomes more robust and affordable. Despite substantial biological constraints associated with expansion to every new organism, the growing spectrum of techniques (illustrated in Part I of this book) has already allowed researchers to overcome the encountered problems for many diverse microbes. Moreover, the respective methods, once established in a given species, may be seamlessly expanded toward acquisition of massive data in a variety of experimental conditions. The rapid accumulation of genome-scale essentiality data, even if not matching the volume of sequencing or expression data, would soon create similar bioinformatics challenges. Indeed, such challenges are already apparent despite a relatively modest volume of currently available data.

A collection of chapters assembled in this volume provides an illustration of remarkable technological progress in genome-scale essentiality analysis in a variety of microbial species. In accord with other genomic techniques, one may anticipate that the volume of essentiality data will continue to grow at an accelerated pace as the technology becomes more robust and affordable. Despite substantial biological constraints associated with expansion to every new organism, the growing spectrum of techniques (illustrated in Part I of this book) has already allowed researchers to overcome the encountered problems for many diverse microbes. Moreover, the respective methods, once established in a given species, may be seamlessly expanded toward acquisition of massive data in a variety of experimental conditions. The rapid accumulation of genome-scale essentiality data, even if not matching the volume of sequencing or expression data, would soon create similar bioinformatics challenges. Indeed, such challenges are already apparent despite a relatively modest volume of currently available data.

Some of the bioinformatics aspects of gene-essentiality studies are highlighted in Part II of this book. As in other high-throughput technologies, a problem of converting experimental observations to reliable assertions of gene essentiality is the focus of the first stage of data analysis. Despite a deceivingly simple form (essential or dispensable), generation of these assignments is associated with substantial ambiguity. A specific challenge of many essentiality screens is that the actual experimental observations (of viable mutants) are obtained only for dispensable genes, whereas the essentiality is inferred from the “negative data” (inability to obtain viable mutants). Whereas this and other aspects of primary data analysis were successfully handled in a number of studies (including those presented in this book, see   Chapters 2 to   15 ), relatively little progress was made toward efficient use of the obtained rich data to address fundamental and applied biological problems. Also in accord with other genomic techniques, we expect the comparative analysis to play a critical role in functional interpretation of gene essentiality data. In this concluding chapter, we will briefly describe the expected implications and the first steps toward establishing this emerging approach (recently reviewed in Ref. 1).

Which classes of biological problems may be addressed by genome-scale essentiality studies? Historically, a key motivation for such studies was a quest for anti-infective drug targets. This is particularly true of the first gene essentiality screens in bacterial pathogens pioneered by a number of industrial research groups (2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7).1 Nevertheless, it is quite obvious that the knowledge of which genes are essential and under which conditions would also strongly contribute to our basic understanding of cellular networks, pathways, mechanisms of adaptation, and so on. Mapping essential genes with unknown functions would directly impact gene and pathway discovery as a direct extension of historic single-gene knockout experiments, a mainstream approach of molecular genetics. Comparative gene essentiality analysis in combination with other techniques of comparative genomics impacts evolutionary concepts, such as a minimal genome abstraction that was discussed in a recent insightful essay by E. Koonin (8). Essentiality analysis in metabolic modeling context (discussed in   Chapters 29 and   30 ) would lead to straightforward applications in the field of strain engineering.

Despite the diversity of these research tasks, underlying motivations, and technical solutions, their implementation would invariably include a comparative analysis of essentiality data obtained in different growth conditions and/or in different species. The first step required to support such comparative studies is an integration of multiple genome-scale essentiality data sets within a genomic resource providing access to various types of functional data. Some of the first Web resources featuring essentiality data for a single model organism (e.g., PEC, or Profiling of E. coli Chromosome) or for multiple organisms (e.g., DEG, or Database of Essential Genes) were briefly introduced in   Chapters 26 and   27 . The first challenge of data integration is a necessary conversion of the published data obtained by different techniques and presented by a variety of notations into a chosen unified format. Although this step may seem straightforward, a substantial curation and simplification of the original data is often required as an inevitable compromise to enable a straightforward comparative analysis.

Another challenge of comparative analysis arises from the ambiguity of the term essential gene, which varies in meaning from absolutely required for survival to substantially contributing to fitness. It is important to realize that different techniques deliver essentiality assignments that would be closer to one or the other connotation. For example, a comparison of the two studies in Escherichia coli described in this book (  Chapters 6 and   11 ) revealed an almost twofold difference in the number of inferred essential genes. In addition to a large common core (210 genes essential in both studies), the first study based on a random transposon mutagenesis (9) identified 393 essential genes that were deemed dispensable by the results of the gene-by-gene knockout study (10). We believe that this difference largely reflects an aforementioned difference in the meaning of gene “essentiality” assessed by these two techniques. Therefore, the knowledge of the technical details and specific conditions used in every essentiality study is very important for their adequate interpretation.

All comparative essentiality studies can be roughly divided into two major categories: (1) an intraspecies comparison of gene essentiality in different growth conditions and (2) a cross-species comparison. Massive studies of the first type were performed in yeast (11, 12, 13, 14), whereas only a few examples were published for bacterial systems (10,15, 16, 17, 18). The most straightforward application of such studies is the exploration of metabolic pathways and networks. The premise is that a subset of genes dispensable in conditions A (e.g., in the rich medium) but essential in conditions B (e.g., in minimal media) would implicate a group of pathways required for adaptation of the organism to the latter conditions (e.g., by compensating for the lack of certain nutrients in the minimal media).

In the two recent studies, the entire Keio collection (described in   Chapter 11 ) containing 3985 E. coli knockout mutants viable in the rich medium was screened for the ability of individual mutants to grow on the minimal media supplemented by glucose (10) or glycerol (15). Despite certain experimental differences preventing the precise comparison of the two studies, the obtained results converged to a common set of ∼100 conditionally essential genes. Further comparative analysis revealed a remarkable consistency between these experimental observations and predictions of gene essentiality obtained using a metabolic modeling approach (introduced in   Chapter 30 ), providing an important cross-validation of the experimental and computational techniques. A detailed analysis of several detected inconsistencies allowed authors to refine certain aspects of the model and to generate testable hypotheses about functions and expression of individual genes and pathways (15). For example, based on the observed discrepancies between the model predictions and experimental observations related to genes involved in glycerol utilization (a sole carbon source in that study), the authors hypothesized that only one of the two possible alternative routes was functionally expressed under given conditions. This hypothesis was further supported by the difference in the expression pattern of respective genes established by focused reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) experiments. Based on these first encouraging results, one may anticipate that an expansion of differential essentiality screens toward a larger variety of growth conditions and bacterial species will significantly impact our understanding of cellular networks, pathways, and individual genes.

Quite obviously, this type of comparative analysis (quantitative or qualitative) of gene essentiality data should be performed within the framework integrating high-quality genomic annotations (functional assignments of gene products), components of metabolic reconstruction (biochemical reactions and pathways), and other types of functional genomic data (e.g., gene expression). Among the first steps in this direction is an integration of the currently published genome-scale essentiality data sets in The SEED (http://theseed.uchicago.edu [19]) and NMPDR genomic resources (http://www.nmpdr.org/ [20]). The data are integrated in a simplified binary format that enables their seamless comparative analysis and visualization in the context of encoded subsystems and pathways. The SEED environment provides the user with access to many features and tools that support detailed exploration of genomic and functional contexts of individual genes. Some principles and examples illustrating this analysis were recently discussed in Ref. 1.

For the purposes of functional interpretation of gene essentiality data, it is important to realize that the knowledge of conditionally essential gene products does not automatically translate to the knowledge of essential functional roles and respective cellular processes, such as biochemical reactions. Establishing tentative connections between these concepts is the heart of the metabolic reconstruction technology (see   Chapters 29 and   30 ). The complexity of this task, even if limited in scope by metabolic pathways in a relatively well-studied model system of E. coli, is largely due to a substantial functional redundancy. This redundancy is manifested at various levels, including the existence of isoenzymes (homologous and, in some cases, nonhomologous proteins performing the same functional role), multifunctional proteins, and alternative pathways. It is additionally exacerbated by convoluted and often poorly understood regulatory mechanisms and by incomplete knowledge of certain areas of metabolism. On the bright side, the analysis of essentiality data within the framework of metabolic reconstruction is anticipated to be a powerful approach that would help elucidate many of these problems (as already illustrated by one of the examples above).

An intraspecies comparison of gene essentiality data has been applied also toward identification of genes specifically required for survival of bacterial pathogens in the animal model of infection (but dispensable for growth in laboratory culture). In addition to generating candidate virulence targets, the information obtained in such studies can contribute to understanding pathogenesis-related changes in metabolic and other cellular pathways. Such studies illustrated in this book (e.g.,   Chapter 5 ) are usually based on random transposon mutagenesis followed by populational screens. This is in contrast with conditional essentiality studies described above, where a screening of a systematic collection of knockout mutants appears to be a method of choice. Despite a substantial difference in technology and scope, many aspects of comparative analysis, such as data integration within genomic environment and projection over annotated pathways and subsystems (metabolic and nonmetabolic), are shared by both types of studies.

A cross-species comparative analysis of gene essentiality opens new opportunities in addressing fundamental and applied biological problems, but it also brings additional challenges. Among them, the most daunting task is establishing the accurate equivalencies between the genes in compared species. Claiming that a certain gene, or rather a gene product, is essential or dispensable in two or more distinct species, implies a knowledge of gene equivalence or orthology relationships between the respective genomes. In reality, this knowledge is not always available. Whereas a homology of gene products may be straightforwardly deduced from their sequence similarity, establishing a functional equivalence of such homologues in general requires additional evidence that may be derived from the analysis of genomic and functional context. Although many tools are available to perform such analysis on a case-by-case basis, an accurate genome-scale comparison of essentiality data would require their integration with a collection of consistent high-quality genomic annotations.

Projection of gene essentiality from model species to others is one of the central open problems of the cross-species comparative analysis. An ability to solve this fundamental problem would provide us with an ultimate validation of our understanding of cellular networks. At the same time, it would have important implications in many applied aspects of gene essentiality studies such as identification and ranking of candidate drug targets across the whole spectrum of target pathogens. The practical importance of such projection is obvious as hundreds of completely sequenced genomes of bacterial pathogens are already available compared with a handful of published genome-scale essentiality data sets. Despite the rapid progress in essentiality analysis techniques, the gap in the availability of these two types of data is only expected to grow.

It is important to emphasize that a cross-genome projection of gene essentiality may not be performed based solely on gene orthology, even if the latter could be firmly established. This hurdle originates from the existence of nonorthologous gene displacements (21) and alternative metabolic routes causing functional redundancy of pathways. For example, although all the de novo riboflavin biosynthesis genes (ribABDHE) are essential in E. coli, their orthologs are dispensable in Bacillus subtilis due to the existence of an additional riboflavin salvage pathway mediated by a specific transporter (gene ypaA in B. subtilis). E. coli lacks the riboflavin transport capability and has to synthesize it de novo despite the abundance of this vitamin in the growth media. At the same time, the gene ribF, encoding a bifunctional enzyme converting riboflavin to indispensable red-ox cofactors flavin mononucleotide (FMN) and flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD), is essential in both species. (For a more detailed comparative analysis of this pathway in the context of drug target identification, see Ref. 22.)

The existence of various combinations of alternative routes in a variety of diverse species is characteristic of most (if not all) known metabolic pathways. In The SEED environment, they are captured as functional variants of subsystems inferred by the detailed comparative analysis of multiple sequenced genomes (19, 23). Many of these subsystems are supplemented with interactive diagrams (pathway maps) supporting an ability to display integrated essentiality data by color coding. Notably, even the simplest presentation of that kind constitutes a significant first step toward meaningful comparative analysis, interpretation, and tentative projection of essentiality between species. To continue with the example of the FMN and FAD biosynthesis subsystem,2 it is likely that in Gram-positive pathogens Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pneumoniae, a full complement of gene orthologs matching precisely the functional variant of B. subtilis (including the ypaA transporter) will also contain only one essential gene (ribF) encoding a bifunctional riboflavin kinase/FAD synthase. Moreover, using the same reasoning style, one may conjecture that in a related pathogen, Streptococcus pyogenes, which lacks the entire de novo biosynthesis of riboflavin but contains an ortholog of ypaA transporter, the latter gene is likely to be essential.

This example (additional examples are discussed in Ref. 1) illustrates the opportunities provided by subsystems-based comparative analysis of gene essentiality. Despite a qualitative nature and obvious limitations due to focusing on quasi-isolated subsystems with arbitrary boundaries, this approach provides a reasonable compromise between a dubious gene-by-gene analysis and a rigorous whole-cell modeling, which is currently feasible for only a handful of model species (see   Chapters 29 and   30 ). Another advantage of the subsystems-based approach is that many (but not all) of its elements are expandable toward nonmetabolic subsystems that are not amenable to modeling by existing techniques.

In conclusion, it is tempting to point to some anticipated trends and directions of gene essentiality analysis technology development in the near future. Our main projection is that as the volume and quality of the available essentiality data continue to grow, a substantial effort will be allocated to the development of adequate bioinformatics resources and tools supporting efficient data analysis and interpretation. We expect a comparative approach based on integration and analysis of the essentiality data within the framework of pathways, subsystems, and whole-cell models to be in the forefront of these bioinformatics developments. We have already mentioned an anticipated expansion of conditional essentiality studies toward dozens of growth conditions in a variety of species. In addition to that, we expect the development of a more sophisticated, quantitative approach to gene essentiality analysis. To rephrase George Orwell’s famous phrase, “... some genes are more essential than others!” It may sound like an oxymoron, but only with respect to a conventional binary view (essential vs. dispensable). However, the metrics of gene essentiality could be established to reflect the actual contribution of a given gene to organism fitness in given conditions. Depending on a particular experimental setup, this would be captured by the effect of gene inactivation on the growth rate, on the frequency of a respective mutant in a mixed population, and so on. Some of these metrics have been already used in publications and are presented in this book ([11, 12, 13]; see   Chapters 15 and   25 ). A respective bioinformatics challenge would be to progress from qualitative (binary) comparative analysis toward explicit use of quantitative data. These data would be captured (and probably even acquired; see   Chapters 14 and   15 ) in a format of microarray expression data, and they will likely be analyzed using similar techniques. Finally, the next technical breakthrough may be anticipated in the direction of synthetic lethality studies in at least a few model bacteria. This approach, a systematic analysis of double-knockout mutants, is already established, and it is being successfully developed in the yeast model (  Chapter 15 ). The results obtained by this approach would reveal network interdependencies that are masked in single-knockout experiments. Among other implications, a synthetic lethality approach would allow us to address many problems associated with functional redundancy of genes and pathways mentioned above. Needless to say, a comparative bioinformatics analysis is expected to play a crucial role in the interpretation of these new data.
