The genome reduction hypothesis and the phylogeny of eukaryotes
Abstract
The first steps in eukaryotic evolution appear difficult to retrace despite the availability of an increasing amount of data. Current molecular phylogenies suggest that the eukaryotic tree would be better represented as a bush of major lineages whose order of emerge is poorly resolved. Such lack of resolution is often explained by a radiation event that would have left very little ancient signal in eukaryotic molecular markers. We suggest a complementary genomic approach that might help tackling this major issue. It rests on a hypothesis, the genome reduction hypothesis (GRH), suggesting that the divergence of major eukaryotic lineages might have been coupled with independent genomic reduction events, starting from a large and partially redundant chimerical genome. Thus, significant and coherent patterns of shared ancestral gene losses between major eukaryotic lineages might help polarizing the most basal nodes in the eukaryotic phylogeny. We propose a test for the GRH that exploits the increasing availability of complete eukaryotic genomes in public databases.

Reconstructing the eukaryotic phylogeny has been one of the major goals of evolutionists since the 19th century. Ultrastructural and molecular characters suggest the existence of several major groups, including opisthokonts (animals, choanoflagellates and fungi), plants (land plants, green algae, red algae and glaucocystophytes), alveolates, stramenopiles, euglenozoa, diplomonads, parabasalids and kinetoplastids 1, 2, 3. However, the relationships between these major groups are largely unresolved, leaving several interesting questions about the evolution of eukaryotes unanswered, particularly the placement of the root. Indeed, the paucity of truly homologous ultrastructural characters 1, 4 and a limited fossil record ([5] and references therein) hamper a reliable polarization of the order of emergence of major eukaryotic lineages. Molecular phylogenetic analyses using large datasets of multiple markers have significantly improved the definition of relationships within large eukaryotic groups for which sequence data are available 2, 6, 7. Moreover, several lineages traditionally viewed as early diverging have been relocated to later branches, suggesting that all extant eukaryotes might indeed belong to the unresolved top of the phylogeny. Nevertheless, the order of emergence of major lineages remains largely unresolved despite the use of these large datasets. It thus appears that molecular phylogeny approaches, while resolving very ancient events such as chloroplast acquisition [6], fail to recover the first steps in eukaryotic evolution 8, 9. The use of other types of characters has been recently suggested, such as insertion and/or deletion events (indels). A two-amino-acid indel in the gene encoding enolase was suggested to support parabasalids as the first diverging eukaryotic lineage [10]. However, it was later shown that this result was probably misleading owing to convergence [11]. Another character – fusion of the genes encoding dihydrofolate reductase and thymidylate synthase (DHFR–TS) – was recently used to suggest a rooting for the eukaryotic tree between opisthokonts and bikonts (see Glossary and Box 1) [12]. The strength of evolutionary conclusions based on such characters has been discussed [13]. For example, DHFR–TS trees are not robust, and the lack of DHFR–TS genes in amoebozoa leaves their position unresolved [12]. Similarly to the approach used to root the universal phylogeny, the tree of eukaryotes might be rooted by the use of genes duplicated in their ancestor, provided that hidden paralogy is accurately identified and methodological problems eschewed.

Box 1
Box 1. Using shared ancestral gene losses to retrace early events in the eukaryotic tree
A schematic consensus of the relationships between eukaryotes as indicated by fossil record 5, 15, molecular data (e.g. 7, 8, 9), transition analyses [3] and the dihydrofolate reductase and thymidylate synthase (DHFR–TS) gene fusion is shown in Figure Ia (see main text) [12]. Despite these lines of evidence, basal nodes remain poorly resolved. The presence of a fused DHFR–TS gene in plants, alveolates, kinetoplastids, parabasalids and stramenopiles suggests that the root of the eukaryotic tree should lie between these taxa (grouped under the name of bikonts [12]) and opisthokonts, which have separated genes. However, this character leaves the phylogenetic position of amoebozoa unresolved because this group lacks DHFR–TS. An example of how the identification of shared ancestral gene losses (SALs) might help to improve the base of the tree as well as relationships within the bikontes is shown in Figure Ib. Type I H+-vacuolar pyrophosphatase (H+-Ppase) is present in some prokaryotes (proteobacteria, bacteroides, actinobacteria, fusobacteria and archaea) and some eukaryotes (plants, kinetoplastids, alveolates and stramenopiles), but seems to be absent in opisthokonts where it might have been ancestrally lost. Interestingly, amoebozoa also seem to lack this gene. By reviewing ongoing genome sequencing and expressed sequenced tags projects, no homologues of Type I H+-vacuolar pyrophosphatase were identified in Dictyostelium discoideum (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast; http://dicty.sdsc.edu/; http://www.sanger.ac.uk/cgi-bin/blast/; http://www.uni-koeln.de/dictyostelium/; http://genome.imb-jena.de/cgi-bin/dicty/BlastDicty.cgi) or in Entamoeba histolytica, Entamoeba terrapinae, Entamoeba invadens and Entamoeba moshkovskii (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast, http://www.tigr.org/tdb/, http://www.sanger.ac.uk/DataSearch/). A partial sequence of a putative homologue was found in Mastigamoeba balamuthi (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast). However, phylogenetic analysis (data not shown) suggests that this partial sequence is related to Type II H+-vacuolar pyrophosphatase, a second group of pyrophosphatases probably transferred recently to some eukaryotes [27]. Thus, lack of the Type I H+-vacuolar pyrophosphatase might represent a SAL between amoebozoa and opisthokonts. In addition, if confirmed by a significant number of similar SALs, this might suggest a rooting of the eukaryotic tree between these two groups and bikonts.

The difficulties in resolving the base of the eukaryotic tree might have several explanations. Known methodological problems might bias the inference of ancient evolutionary relationships, such as multiple substitutions leading to molecular saturation and erosion of the genuine phylogenetic signal, or misplacement of fast-evolving sequences by long-branch attraction[14]. In addition, the following biological rationale is commonly suggested: the difficulty of retracing ancient nodes in the eukaryotic tree might be the result of a radiation event [15]. The paucity of ancient phylogenetic signal in present-day eukaryotic molecular markers might thus be explained by the fact that first eukaryotic lineages would have diverged in a relatively short timeframe. If this hypothesis is true, classical molecular phylogeny approaches might not be very efficient in recovering the most basal nodes of the eukaryotic phylogeny, despite the use of massive sequence datasets.

Here, we propose a biological mechanism that might be consistent with the lack of resolution at the base of eukaryotic tree, and suggest an alternative way to gather signal at ancient nodes and possibly improve the resolution of the order of emergence of eukaryotic basal lineages.

1. The genome reduction hypothesis and its phylogenetic consequences
Symbioses are often called upon to explain the origin of the first eukaryotic cells [16]. Recent models suggest eukaryogenesis from archaeal and/or proteobacterial metabolic consortia 17, 18 or from engulfment of a proteobacterium by some mutant phagotrophic actinobacterium [3]. These hypotheses are consistent with evidence that no extant amitochondriate eukaryotes are primitively so [19]. All these eukaryogenesis models converge at least on one point: that the ancestor of the eukaryotic cell had a large and partially redundant genetic content, contributed by at least two different sources. In early eukaryotic evolution, the genomes from these different sources might have undergone significant interplay, such as, for example, massive gene transfers from symbiont to host [20]. This would have provided an enormous potential to test novelties and evolve a unique genetic complement (i.e. the universal core of eukaryotic-specific genes). Then, a subsequent phase of early eukaryotic evolution might have been largely characterized by competition between first diverging lineages to colonize novel niches.

In the context of symbiotic eukaryogenesis models, we propose that differential events of reductions of the large ancestral genomic content might have accompanied the divergence of major eukaryotic lineages [the genome reduction hypothesis (GRH)]. Indeed, such a reduction would have led mechanically to shorter generation times and, thus, a higher colonization potential of some lineages over others. Although genome size is not the only factor affecting replication rate in eukaryotes 21, 22, it might have been one of the most important factors in early diverging eukaryotes. Moreover, genomic reduction might have been coupled to the dispensability of several functions following adaptation to novel ecological niches. At this early stage of eukaryotic evolution, losses might have similarly affected both the symbiont [23] and the host (e.g. loss of methanogenesis or thermophyly in the archaeal or actinobacterial host, respectively 3, 17, 24, 25). Gene losses might also have played a direct role in the adaptation process by reshaping the genome structure, changing patterns of regulation and expression, and favouring gene fusions. Early diverging eukaryotic lineages harbouring different genomic contents would have thus been rapidly isolated and bound to independent evolutionary fates.

The immediate consequence of the GRH is the divergence of major eukaryotic cell lineages with different genomic sub-samples to the exclusion of the essential core of genes. Under this hypothesis, specific gene losses were indeed among the novelties that characterized and isolated each major lineage at this early stage of eukaryotic evolution. This first rapid adaptation period would have been followed by a classical evolution pattern made up of divergence caused by duplications, expansions and secondary losses, as seen in present-day species.

The hypothesis of differential genome sub-sampling during the first steps of eukaryotic evolution is consistent with a radiation at the base of the eukaryotic phylogeny. More importantly, the GRH indicates a way to tackle resolution of the first steps in eukaryotic diversification by stretching the short branches at the base of the tree. In fact, this hypothesis suggests the use of a different type of early phylogenetic signal: as major lineages diverged by a mechanism of sub-sampling of the ancestral genome, their relationships might be better defined by shared ancestral gene losses (SALs), rather than by patterns of substitutions in molecular markers. This is counterintuitive with respect to molecular phylogeny approaches, which look specifically at broadly distributed markers to reconstruct the eukaryotic tree. However, we wish to stress that such a reductive process would have acted only at a very early stage of eukaryotic diversification, and that, consequently, SALs might be used only to tackle the very first divergences in the eukaryotic tree. By contrast, synapomorphies in broadly distributed genes would continue to represent a precious tool to improve resolution within large monophyletic groups.

2. Testing the genome reduction hypothesis
The GRH is testable by accurate identification of SALs. This can be achieved by retracing the pool of eukaryotic nuclear genes that would have been sub-sampled from the ancestral genome during the divergence of major lineages. This involves searching for eukaryotic genes with a prokaryotic outgroup. Figure 1 describes an ideal way of testing the GRH based on BLAST searches of complete genomes from representatives of major eukaryotic lineages by using as seeds the totality of ORFs of either archaeal or bacterial genomes. Three types of outputs can be expected. First, several ORFs that do not retrieve any eukaryotic homologue might be observed [Figure 1(i)]. These might be either bacterial and/or archaeal novelties; or genes that have evolved beyond recognition in eukaryotes; or genes that were lost by genome reduction in all major eukaryotic lines. Second, a proportion of ORFs that have homologues in all major eukaryotic groups might be found [Figure 1(ii)]. These broadly distributed genes might, together with universal eukaryotic-specific genes, constitute the starting core of the eukaryotic ancestral genome, and are actually the markers currently used for reconstruction of the eukaryotic phylogeny. Third, a pool of ORFs that retrieve homologues in all major eukaryotic lineages to the exclusion of a few might be identified [Figure 1(iii)]. These genes constitute the set of characters used to test the GRH because they were probably lost in the ancestor of these few major lines. False negatives need to be accurately identified: genes secondarily re-acquired by subsequent lateral transfer in some members of a major lineage might be detected on a phylogenetic tree. An example of this would be genes absent from basal members of a monophyletic group, but present in late-emerging species, and whose outgroup is at odds with the reference phylogeny. This is also the case for genes of probable chloroplast origin (i.e. shared mostly by plants and prokaryotes) given that, in plants, the contribution of plastid genes to the nucleus might have been dramatic (up to 20% of the genome content of Arabidopsis thaliana might have come from the cyanobacterial endosymbiont 20, 23). Consequently, the shared absence of such genes in non-chloroplastic lineages should be considered with caution. The same reasoning is applicable to false positives, as in the case of adaptive secondary genome reduction (genes absent from all parasitic members of a basal lineage but present in their free-living relatives). In addition, SALs involving genes implicated in mitochondrial metabolism should be excluded given their probable convergence in secondarily amitochondriate eukaryotes.

The pattern of SALs in pairs of major eukaryotic lineages should either support or reject the GRH. In fact, if the number of SALs is low (Figure 1a), an event of massive genome reduction is unlikely, and the GRH is not supported. By contrast, if numerous SALs are identified (Figure 1b,c) the GRH is favoured and might help to identify ancient sister groupings. If the proportion of SALs is similar across major lineages (Figure 1b), this might indicate simultaneous branching from the ancestor by massive gene-losses during a star-like divergence, and the information carried by SALs would be hard to extract. Alternatively, if a significantly higher proportion of SALs is observed in some lineage pairs than in others (Figure 1c), this might be an indication of kinship. Coherence between different SALs would strongly suggest that they do not result from convergences, especially if they involve genes from different functional pathways. The most promising BLAST outputs might be analysed more in-depth by further phylogenetic analysis, or confirmed by gene sequencing from target organisms.

Box 1 describes the possible use of SALs to retrace ancient eukaryotic relationships, such as that for H+-vacuolar pyrophosphatase. This enzyme characterizes the acidocalcisomes – organelles present in some prokaryotic and eukaryotic species [26]. Type I H+-vacuolar pyrophosphatases are present in prokaryotes and bikonts (notably, alveolates, kinetoplastids and plants), but are missing in opisthokonts [27]. The gene encoding this enzyme also seems to be absent in amoebozoa because no homologues were found among available sequence data from this group (Box 1). Type I H+-vacuolar pyrophosphatase might represent a promising example of the use of SALs because it could shed light on the root of the eukaryotic tree. In fact, although it awaits further confirmation and additional support, this SAL might suggest a placement of the root of the eukaryotic tree between bikonts and opisthokonts/amoebozoa (Box 1).

Unfortunately, this test for the GRH is at-present limited by the scarce sampling of genomes from representatives of major eukaryotic lineages. In fact, currently available complete genomes are restricted to opisthokonts, plants and one parasitic member from alveolates (http://wit.integratedgenomics.com/GOLD/) – a very limited sampling of eukaryotic diversity. However, the ongoing sequencing of genomes representative of many additional major lineages will soon enable testing of the GRH. Alternatively, target genes from basal representatives of major eukaryotic lineages could be sequenced. These genes would generally be discarded in classical phylogeny analyses because, to the exclusion of the outgroup, they harbour a too-restricted taxonomic distribution. For example, an important number of gene families common to opisthokonts and prokaryotes were not found in the complete genome of Arabidopsis, including those coding for: (i) proteins involved in DNA repair and recombination; (ii) anchoring of the cytoskeleton to the plasma membrane; and (iii) several transcription factors [28]. Investigating the pattern-of-absence of such genes in basal members of major eukaryotic lineages other than plants might thus be a highly promising approach in the frame of our hypothesis. Similarly, the B-subunit of topoisomerase VI (Top6B), apparently shared only by archaea and plants, could provide an interesting target [29]. Additional target genes might be identified in the PACE (Proteins of Archaea Conserved in Eukaryotes), which is a recent survey of archaeal ORFs with homologues of unknown function in complete eukaryotic genomes [30].

3. Concluding remarks
Resolution of the most basal events in eukaryotic evolution represents one of the major goals of biology. Here, we have suggested both a biological mechanism that might have been coupled to the hypothetical radiation early in eukaryotic evolution, and a genomic approach that might complement molecular phylogenetics in gathering additional signal at ancient nodes. Indeed, identification of significant and coherent patterns of shared ancestral gene losses might provide information on early eukaryotic evolution and complement the use of synapomorphies in broadly distributed molecular markers. Rather than being a limiting factor, the hypothetical eukaryotic radiation could be exploited to retrace the most basal branches of the eukaryotic tree, especially if its possible biological mechanisms are investigated.

