The PIWI domain plays a role in dsRNA guided hydrolysis of ssRNA in a variety of cellular pathways involved in binding and cleaving of RNA. Ever since its discovery in the PIWI/ARGO superfamily, the PIWI module is being identified in a growing number of cellular pathways such as RNA interference, chromatin organization, germline maintenance, and was found to bind different classes of small noncoding RNAs that guide Argonaute proteins to their targets. Based on profile-profile comparisons, Burroughs and coworkers describe two new subfamilies of PIWI, both showing a residue conservation pattern characteristic of guide-strand binding but not those of catalytic activity. One of the subfamilies, PIWI-RE is found in bacteria, and the conservation is supported by similar chromosomal contexts which leads the authors to suggest that it plays a part in a novel RNA-dependent restriction system. The other subfamily, MedPIWI is found in the Med13 subunit of the Mediator complex in eukaryotes. MedPIWI shows distinctive residue conservation patterns that indicate an involvement in ds nucleic acid binding but no catalytic activity. The authors hypothesize that MedPIWI’s role may be an ssRNA-mediated activation of the conformational switch through which the CDK8 subcomplex modulates transcription at Mediator-bound promoters. Both subfamilies are widely distributed, PIWI-RE is found in firmicutes, actinobacteria, α/β/γ-proteobacteria, cyanobacteria, and chloroflexi. MedPIWI is found in plants, fungi, animals, slime molds, and stramenopiles as well as basal eukaryotes.

I find the analysis straightforward and highly convincing, and the conclusions, even though daring and imaginative, are well within the expected limits of scientific interpretation. The structure of the manuscript is logical, even though the description of two subfamilies within one article may somewhat divide the attention of the reader. In conclusion, I recommend publication of this manuscript without further changes.