Szathmáry and coworkers seek to answer the question re when complex metabolism could have originated in the course of evolution. The question is highly relevant, and to the best of my knowledge it has not been tackled by other studies. Timing in relation to the major evolutionary transitions is an original and elegant idea that is especially suited for modeling studies. The authors propose that specialist enzymes emerged after the appearance of the chromosome because protocells harbouring unlinked genes maintain largely aspecific enzymes to reduce their assortment load.

The authors attack the problem using an elegant model of a population of protocells. The presentation of the model is clear and straightforward, and the authors show that the model is robust in the sense that some changes in the methodology do not affect the qualitative outcome of the simulations. This is where I would like to raise my first question. Metabolism implemented in the paper is based on a linear set of reactions. While there are linear anabolic pathways (e.g. fatty acid synthesis), many of the supposedly ancient pathways have more complex topology. Do the results of the model change if different topologies, in particular the autocatalytic cycle, are also considered?

As my background is in biochemistry, I cannot resist asking questions regarding the nature of enzyme-substrate interactions. The authors admit that their representation of this interaction is a rather abstract one. I agree that such a representation is adequate for the question at hand. Nevertheless, it should be discussed in some depth, the consequences of the abstraction, in comparison to “real” enzyme-substrate interactions. While Kacser and Beeby employed 3D blocks in their cited study, Szilágyi et al. here assume hypercubes of n>3 dimensions. What is the precise meaning of these dimensions? Furthermore, more realistic descriptions, used for instance in classical molecular dynamics, apply a variety of explicitly described molecular interaction types. Why did the authors choose the Lennard-Jones potential, and would it make a difference if other interactions would also be considered?

The results are nicely presented and the underlying mechanism adequately discussed. The mention of regulation in the outlook is very important, there is often much talk about enzyme catalysis, but less about the regulation and coordination required for a truly complex metabolism. That notwithstanding, I missed a discussion of minimal metabolism in the paper. Namely, the metabolic complexity required at different stages of the evolution of life sets a minimum requirement on the number of reactions needed. One would expect that the invention of chromosome would also lead to new enzyme functions. I would like that the authors discuss this matter in the paper.

In summary, I consider this paper will be a welcome addition to the field, and warmly recommend for publication in Biology Direct.