Tumor suppressor p53 is unique in the sense that it regulates over a thousand human genes. p53 is known to bind to a cognate site consisting of two decameric half sites separated by a spacer. Recently it has been found that many of the sites that bind p53 in vivo are within transposable elements. One should note that in vivo binding sites (BSs) are not necessarily functional p53 response elements (REs). The interesting study of Cui and associates asks the question whether or not REs also reside in transposable elements, particularly Alu repeats. The authors find that BSs are located in the same regions of Alu repeats as are REs, namely in the vicinity of A/A' and B boxes of the internal RNA polymerase III promoter. The authors conclude that Alu residing p53 sites may have evolved through a mechanism that is different from that of the corresponding Alu consensus sequences and suggest that the strongest binding sites are embedded in the young Alu repeats. My questions are:

a) Can one estimate the background probability of occurrence of the motifs tested? In other words, can one assign a statistical significance to the findings?

For Figure ​Figure4A,4A, the average for the four peaks is 71,885, while the average and RMSD for the background are 10,141 and 4,234 respectively. In this case, the difference between the 'peaks' and the background equals 14.58 × σ (14.58 = (71885 - 10141)/4234). From the Student t-test http://studentsttest.com, we have p < 10-6 for both cases.

b) At the first glance the periodicity of occurrence vs. spacer length on Figure ​Figure3,3, ​,4,4, ​,55 falls close to half of B-DNA periodicity that may be correlated with the sidedness of a recognition site - is the periodicity statistically insignificant?

The Alu elements originated from the 7SL RNA, which is a part of the Signal Recognition Particle (SRP) [59]. Therefore, the occurrence of p53 sites with certain spacer S is the consequence of the 7SL RNA sequence organization: the tetramers in Box B at positions ~100 to ~110 (shown in blue, green and ochre in Figure ​Figure6),6), are separated by 1 and 2 bp (which corresponds to the shifts of 5 and 6 bp respectively). To find if this has any structural meaning, one has to analyze the crystal structures of the SRP, which contains 7SL RNA and several proteins [59]. We are afraid that any analysis of this kind would be based on numerous assumptions and thus would be quite speculative.