Hydrogen, metals, bifurcating electrons, and proton gradients: The early evolution of biological energy conservation

Abstract
Life is a persistent, self‐specified set of far from equilibrium chemical reactions. In modern microbes, core carbon and energy metabolism are what keep cells alive. In very early chemical evolution, the forerunners of carbon and energy metabolism were the processes of generating reduced carbon compounds from CO2 and the mechanisms of harnessing energy as compounds capable of doing some chemical work. The process of serpentinization at alkaline hydrothermal vents holds promise as a model for the origin of early reducing power, because Fe2+ in the Earth's crust reduces water to H2 and inorganic carbon to methane. The overall geochemical process of serpentinization is similar to the biochemical process of methanogenesis, and methanogenesis is similar to acetogenesis in that both physiologies allow energy conservation from the reduction of CO2 with electrons from H2. Electron bifurcation is a newly recognized cytosolic process that anaerobes use generate low potential electrons, it plays an important role in some forms of methanogenesis and, via speculation, possibly in acetogenesis. Electron bifurcation likely figures into the early evolution of biological energy conservation.

1 Introduction
Life is a process of harnessing energy. All models for the chemical‐evolutionary transition from the elements on the early Earth to free living cells recognize the requirement for a sustained source of energy. Among the main possible sources of energy that have been discussed, ultraviolet radiation 1, electric discharge 2, pyrite (FeS2) synthesis 3, and molecular hydrogen (H2) 4 currently stand in the foreground 5. Although energy is essential for the origin of life, energy alone is not enough. To be useful for biological systems, energy needs to be conserved, or harnessed, in some form of biochemical currency that can be translated into chemical syntheses and metabolic work. Accordingly, concepts regarding the source of energy that powered early evolution tend to be paired with a concept about carbon metabolism: the ultraviolet radiation and electric discharge theories assume that the first organisms were fermenting heterotrophs while the pyrite and H2 theories assume that the first organisms were autotrophs that obtained their carbon from CO2. Pyrite synthesis as an energy source is conceptually linked with the reverse citric acid cycle 6, 7, while the idea that H2 was the first main biological energy source is paired with the Wood–Ljungdahl (acetyl‐CoA) pathway 4, 8. The purpose of this paper is to contrast and explore ideas about the nature of early biological energy conservation in the context of some newer findings about how modern anaerobic autotrophs conserve chemical energy.

2 No soup for starters, but maybe vents
Theories involving organic soup or prebiotic broth 9 entail a two stage process: energy input from ultraviolet light 1, electric discharge 2 or interstellar processes 10 to make organic soup, then a second stage in which biologically useful energy is somehow gleaned from that stable, preformed collection of reduced organic compounds, either via oxidation entailing compounds like Fe3+ as oxidants 10, or via disproportionations. Both variants correspond to heterotrophy in modern metabolism. Because the simplest forms of heterotrophy involve fermentations, heterotrophy first models have assumed that the first organisms were fermenters that conserved their biochemical energy through substrate level phosphorylations (SLPs) alone. Heterotrophic origin theories thus have two distinct phases of energetic processes at the onset of life: environmental energy spent to reduce CO2, a portion of which remains stored in organic molecules, and is later harnessed when organic soup serves as a substrate for fermentation.

The list of problems with heterotrophy first models is long 11, 12. From the bioenergetic standpoint, two problems appear sufficiently severe that prebiotic broth can be excluded from further consideration. First, prebiotic soup models assume that after the synthesis of organic soup, the process of life somehow starts from a mixture of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen that already has reacted; organic soup is at or very close to equilibrium. Life, by contrast, is a far from equilibrium process 13. If we homogenize any organism so as to destroy the cellular structure, but keeping all the molecular constituents needed for life intact, and wait for any amount of time in anticipation of those constituents reorganizing into living cells once again, we will be disappointed. Living systems are open systems undergoing carbon and energy flux through very small volumes in space (corresponding to the size of a cell); the site and chemistry of life's origin should have those properties. Second, anaerobic fermenters like Clostridia have traditionally been viewed as representing both ancient lineages and ancient fermentative metabolic types 14, and it was long assumed that their fermentations entail solely SLP. But it turns out that clostridial type fermentations entail chemiosmosis, the generation of ion gradients across the cytoplasmic membrane and the harvesting of those gradients via rotor–stator type ATPases 15. Fermenters that conserve their ATP via substrate level phosphorylations alone are very rare and even such reduced fermentative specialists as Mycoplasma genitalium make use of chemiosmosis and rotor–stator type ATPases to generate membrane potential for import and maintenance of ion homeostasis 16, 17. In modern biology, all free living fermenters are either themselves chemiosmotic 15 or are strictly dependent upon organisms that produce fermentable substrates with the help of chemiosmotic energy harnessing. That circumstance is very problematic for theories holding that the first cells were pure fermenters that emerged from a puddle, a pond, or an ocean of organic soup.

The discovery of submarine hydrothermal vents revealed chemically reactive environments, far from equilibrium conditions, as well as temperature, redox and pH gradients 18 and had lasting impact on theories concerning the origin of life. Such far from equilibrium conditions have more in common with life processes than organic soup, and vents might also provide a window into conditions on the early Earth 18. While submarine hydrothermal vents brought modern biology and thoughts on life's chemical origins closer together, there remained considerable debate about temperature 19, because the black smoker types of vents harbor water that is 350 °C hot. At the same time, thoughts about the nature of the most ancestral kinds of metabolism gradually shifted away from fermentations and towards autotrophy 11, 18, especially with the characterization of prokaryotes living in such chemically reactive environments 20. The characterization of hydrogen rich alkaline hydrothermal vents with mild temperatures of around 70 °C 21, 22 underscored once more the possible relevance of submarine vents in early evolution 23, 24. Geochemistry thus offered fresh chemical, energetic, and thermodynamic perspectives on biochemical origins 25. During those developments, two concepts emerged with regard to the source of energy at the origin of life: pyrite and hydrogen.

3 Pyrite and the reverse citric acid cycle
Wächtershäuser's theory posits that the exergonic synthesis of pyrite (FeS2) from iron monosulfide (FeS) and H2S fuelled the first metabolic cycles 3, 6, 7, 26 according to the reaction

with an estimated urn:x-wiley:22115463:media:feb2s0014579311007101:feb2s0014579311007101-math-0003 at pH 7 7. That idea is closely linked with the idea that CO2 entered metabolism via the reverse TCA cycle in an overall reaction that was pulled by pyrite synthesis :
with an estimated urn:x-wiley:22115463:media:feb2s0014579311007101:feb2s0014579311007101-math-0005 6. The thermodynamic favorability of that reaction has, however, come under scrutiny. Schoonen et al. 27 pointed out a number of difficulties with the temperature dependence and kinetic properties of pyrite‐dependent CO2 reduction. Kalapos 28 pointed out some stoichiometric issues with FeS2 synthesis and obtained less favorable thermodynamic values for the production of oxalacetate

with an estimated urn:x-wiley:22115463:media:feb2s0014579311007101:feb2s0014579311007101-math-0009 28 via the reductive tricarboxylic acid (rTCA) cycle. Michalkova et al. 29 examined the details of acetate synthesis from CH3SH and CO with respect to pyrite‐pulled reactions and found unfavorable thermodynamic values with regard to pyrite. But it should be recalled that the synthesis of acetate (and the thioester methylthioacetate) did go forward 30, whereby it is often overlooked that some of the best yields reported 30 were obtained with NiSO4 alone as the catalyst, conditions under which pyrite (for lack of either iron or sulfide in the experiment) could not have been produced.
Wächtershäuser's theory of a pyrite pulled rTCA cycle predicts the presence of the rTCA cycle in the common ancestor of all prokaryotes 26. But in contrast to earlier assumptions 31 the rTCA cycle is not found among archaebacteria known so far 32, 33. Another problem is that in modern microbes, the rTCA cycle is, in known cases, always supported by an independent and chemiosmotic energy metabolism. When chemiosmosis was incorporated into Wächtershäuser's theory, it came as a casual afterthought and with the proton gradient backwards at first (acid inside), requiring the assumption that cells somehow inverted their cytosol from outside to inside, and without specifying any redox partners, squeezing the origin of bioenergetics as it exists in the real world into a footnote 26. Concerning the source of electrons for CO2 reduction in primordial biochemistry, Wächtershäuser states that the half reaction

can be “excluded as the first source of electrons since its reducing potential is not sufficient for reducing CO2” 34, 26. But hydrogenotrophic methanogens and homoacetogens reduce CO2 with H2 for a living, they even conserve energy while reducing CO2 with H2 35-37 it is their core bioenergetic process, raising interesting questions as to how they do that.
4 H2 and Wood–Ljungdahl pathway
Several authors have mentioned in passing that H2 could have been a source of energy for primordial biochemical systems 38-41. If H2 was the electron donor, what was the electron acceptor? From the geochemical standpoint, Sleep et al. 42 underscored the energetic potential of geologically produced H2 stemming from the hydrothermal process of serpentinization to fuel early evolutionary processes, for example methane production. From the chemical thermodynamic standpoint, Shock and colleagues 43, 44 underscored the organic‐synthetic potential of hydrothermal systems to generate reduced carbon compounds because of the H2 accrued in the reducing environment provided by massive amounts of Fe2+ in the Earth's crust, showing for example that amino acid biosynthesis is an exergonic reaction under hydrothermal vent conditions 45. From the biological perspective, Fuchs 46, 47 underscored the simplicity and biochemical antiquity of the Wood–Ljungdahl pathway 48, which is the pathway of CO2 fixation employed by homoacetogenic clostridia and by methanogens. The antiquity of the Wood–Ljungdahl pathway in the context of an origin of life in hydrothermal vents 4, 8 fits well with the kind of chemistry observed in alkaline vents today 21-25, 49.

The Wood–Ljungdahl pathway has several properties that make it attractive as an – or probably the most – ancient pathway of CO2 fixation currently known 4, 46, 47, eight are listed in the following.

1.
The Wood–Ljungdahl (or acetyl‐CoA) pathway is a linear pathway of CO2 fixation 48, not a cyclic one, its most complicated intermediate is a methyl group, and from CO2 through to acetyl‐CoA and on to pyruvate and phosphoenolpyruvate (the next steps in methanogen and homoacetogen CO2 fixation), there are no chiral carbon atoms in any of the pathway intermediate carbon atoms – albeit many in the cofactors, yet not in their active moieties 4.

2.
The enzymes of the pathway are replete with FeS and FeNiS centers 48, 50, consistent with the notion that transition metal sulfides and clusters such as in ferredoxin are ancient relics from the earliest phases of biochemical evolution 51. Furthermore, some of its most important reactions, including the reduction of CO2 52 or the synthesis of acetyl thioesters 30, have been performed in the laboratory using only transition metals (and sulfides thereof) as catalysts.

3.
In the comparison of the pathway as it is manifested in acetogens (eubacteria) and methanogens (archaebacteria), the pterin cofactors tetrahydrofolate and tetrahydromethanopterin are similar 53, the reactions involved are chemically quite similar and possibly homologous, but the enzymes involved are – for the most part – independently evolved and altogether unrelated at the level of sequence and structure. Exceptions are the starting points (CO2 reduction) and the endpoints (thioester synthesis). The MoCo binding protein of W‐dependent formylmethanofuran dehydrogenase from Methanothermobacter thermoatotrophicus is related to clostridial formate dehydrogenase 54 and carbon monoxide dehydrogenase/acetyl‐CoA synthase (CODH/ACS) enzymes from methanogens and acetogens are also clearly related 55. The lack of obvious sequence similarity for the enzymes catalyzing the steps from formylation of the pterin cofactor up to the methyl transfer to CODH/ACS in acetogen–methanogen comparisons suggests that the basic chemistry of the pathway preceded the origin of genes and proteins 4, consistent with the view that when genes and proteins arose, some of them just added catalysis (hence speed and specificity) to reactions that were already occurring anyway, so that reactions that tend to occur spontaneously could occur more rapidly 31. The selective/replicative advantage for genetically specified catalysts that increased the flux of carbon into reactive intermediates from which energy could be harnessed is evident for a pathway that generates reactive C1 intermediates, reactive methyl groups, and energy rich thioesters.

4.
With the elucidation of several new pathways of CO2 fixation in archaebacteria and eubacteria 32, 33, the Wood–Ljungdahl pathway is currently the only pathway of core CO2 fixation known to be present in both eubacteria and archaebacteria. This argues strongly in favor of its antiquity. This also argues strongly in favor of the view that methanogens and acetogens represent the most ancestral autotrophs within the archaea and bacteria, respectively. If we embrace the concept of autotrophic origins, this would argue for the ancestral position of acetogens and methanogens within their respective domains, consistent with newer phylogenetic reports for the basal position of methanogens among archaebacteria 56 and the basal position of firmicutes, which contain the clostridial hydrogenotrophic acetogens, among eubacteria 57.

5.
In both acetogens and methanogens, which use the Wood–Ljungdahl pathway, there are forms known that lack cytochromes. The acetogens that lack cytochromes lack quinones 35, 58. The methanogens that lack cytochromes lack the quinone functional quinone analog methanophenazine 59. Acetogens and methanogens are the only autotrophs known (to this author) that harness energy with the help of chemiosmosis but without the help of quinones or quinone analogs. By virtue of simplicity – no quinones, no cytochromes, no soluble electron carriers in the membrane to pump ions, just single ion pumping protein complexes –, that appears to be an ancient energy metabolic configuration, more ancient than with cytochromes and quinones.

6.
Abiogenic methane and formate are produced from inorganic carbon at Lost City 49, 60, 61. At Lost City geochemical CO2 reduction is driven by serpentinization, a geochemical process as ancient as water on Earth 42 in which Fe2+ in the Earth's crust reduces water in hydrothermal systems to H2 42, 62, and CO2 to carbon compounds that leave the vent through the effluent. Lost City effluent contains about 1 mM methane of abiogenic origin 49, 60, 61. This is important because the theory that life could have arisen at Lost City types of vents carries with it the prediction that such vents should still be able to carry out some of the same chemical reactions today. The circumstance that abiogenic CO2 reduction is observed at Lost City strengthens the case for hydrothermal origins, because an observable, exergonic geological process at hydrothermal vents – methane synthesis through serpentinization – is similar in overall chemistry to a biological process (methanogenesis). Methane production at Lost City narrows, but does not close, the gap between biological and geological methane production and is consistent with geochemical data indicating evidence for methanogenesis in rocks 3.5 billion years of age 63.

7.
The thermodynamics for the overall synthesis of cell mass under Lost City type conditions (alkaline, reducing, moderate temperature effluent interface with ocean water) is favorable. Amend and McCollom 25 and colleagues 64 have found that the overall reaction for the synthesis of the chemical constituents of a microbial cell is exergonic (energy‐releasing) at temperatures of around 50–100 °C for exactly the kind of alkaline hydrothermal vent (chemically similar to Lost City) at the source of current consideration. In other words, the synthesis of life's substance (protein, nucleic acids, cell wall, lipids, etc.) from the concentrations of urn:x-wiley:22115463:media:feb2s0014579311007101:feb2s0014579311007101-math-0011 and electrons (H2) as would be found at the vent ocean interface of such an alkaline hydrothermal system releases energy, even without considering main energy metabolic reactions, just considering anabolic cell mass accumulation. That is very important because many people assume that at life's origin one had to add a special kind of energy somehow (for example in the form of lightning), rather than harnessable chemical energy being available naturally, all the time, via H2 stemming from serpentinization 65.

8.
Importantly, the Wood–Ljungdahl pathway is the only pathway of core CO2 fixation that is also a source of energy conservation 48, 66. All other known pathways of CO2 fixation require supporting energetic input in the form of an independent energy metabolism, for example photosynthesis, sulfate reduction or other respiration 33, 67. Acetogens and methanogens use the Wood–Ljungdahl pathway not only as their core pathway of CO2 fixation, it is also their source of energy conservation: they synthesize ATP at the expense of CO2 fixation, energetically they get a free lunch that they are paid to eat 44. In the reaction of H2 with CO2, the equilibrium lies on the side of acetate and methane, acetogens and methanogens use this energy to generate ion gradients that are used for chemiosmotic ATP synthesis. Acetogens and methanogens live from reactions that involve very small free energy changes 68. The overall methanogenic reaction is summarized as

66; this is enough energy to pump a couple of ions across a membrane, but it is not enough energy to make thioesters for net carbon incorporation and simultaneously to conserve energy through substrate level phosphorylation 69. That is why acetogens and methanogens are dependent upon chemiosmosis for their energy metabolism.

5 The early formyl pterin problem revisited
The notion that the Wood–Ljungdahl pathway is a viable model for prebiotic chemical evolution is not without energetic problems 4. The problem concerns the synthesis of formylated pterins in early biochemical evolution, because the synthesis of N 10‐formyl‐H4F in acetogens and of N 5‐formyl‐H4MPT in methanogens from H2 and CO2 each entails thermodynamically very unfavorable steps. The problem remains interesting, but a new and exciting solution (exciting from the standpoints of physiology and early chemical evolution) is now in sight.

Specifically, for acetogens, the synthesis of N 10 ‐formyltetrahydrofolate from formate and tetrahydrofolate (H4F) is endergonic with urn:x-wiley:22115463:media:feb2s0014579311007101:feb2s0014579311007101-math-0018 53. This is an extremely steep bioenergetic barrier. The reaction catalyzed by N 10‐ formyl‐H4F synthetase goes forward only because it is coupled to ATP hydrolysis. That ATP hydrolysis – by analogy to Clostridium cylindrosporum N 10‐formyl‐H4F synthetase 70, 71 – at the N 10‐ formyl‐H4F synthetase step appears to involve the synthesis of formyl phosphate as the active intermediate. In the absence of enzymes, formyl phosphate will spontaneously formylate H4F specifically at the N 5‐position 72. But without chemiosmotic coupling, no net ATP synthesis for any (anabolic) process other than acetate synthesis is possible 58. And although the exact nature of coupling in acetogens growing on H2 and CO2 is still not known 73, it almost certainly involves Rnf, a protein complex that pumps ions while reducing NAD+ with electrons from ferredoxin 74, 75, and possibly involves an important and newly characterized mechanism of energy conservation, first described in Clostridium kluyveri 76, but turning up in many anaerobes 36, 77, 78 called electron bifurcation 15, 73.

In methanogens, the synthesis of formylmethanofuran from methanofuran (MFR), CO2 and 2[H], catalyzed by formylmethanofuran dehydrogenase, is also highly endergonic (urn:x-wiley:22115463:media:feb2s0014579311007101:feb2s0014579311007101-math-0019 if 2[H] is H2 36. The subsequent transfer of the formyl group to tetrahydromethanopterin (H4MPT) by formylmethanofuran:H4MPT formyltransferase is slightly exergonic, with urn:x-wiley:22115463:media:feb2s0014579311007101:feb2s0014579311007101-math-0020. Even though free formate does not occur in the methanogen pathway, the synthesis of N 5‐formyl‐H4MPT from formate is endergonic with urn:x-wiley:22115463:media:feb2s0014579311007101:feb2s0014579311007101-math-0021 53. The reaction catalyzed by formyl‐MFR dehydrogenase is coupled to later steps of methane synthesis, which involve chemiosmosis, but the nature of that coupling is, significantly, now known 36 to be different to what was recently thought; an earlier paper 4 assumed that the formyl‐MFR dehydrogenase reaction mechanism in hydrogenotrophic methanogens involves chemiosmotic flux of ions into the cytosol through the formyl‐MFR dehydrogenase protein, but that was incorrect, as newer findings show 36.

The problem – the early formyl pterin problem 4 – is this: If the Wood–Ljungdahl pathway is genuinely ancient, and if we turn back the clock to the time before early metabolically competent and replicating systems could harness chemiosmosis (which requires genes and proteins), how did they overcome the steeply uphill energetic barriers to synthesizing formyl pterins as critical intermediates in their core CO2 reduction and energy conservation pathways? The answer appears to lie in a newly recognized aspect of bioenergetics in methanogens and in clostridias (and probably in clostridial acetogens): electron bifurcation.

6 Electron bifurcation in methanogens and clostridial fermenters
The principle of electron bifurcation is familiar. It is a means to drive an endergonic reaction forward by coupling it to an exergonic reaction, but the “energetic currency” of coupling is neither a high energy bond such as a thioester or an anhydride, nor is it a chemisomotic ion gradient, it is a soluble reduced low potential ferredoxin 15, 36, 73, 76-78. A simple explanation of electron bifurcation, which was only recently proposed an as energy conserving mechanism in clostridial‐type fermenters 15, 76, is given by Kaster et al. 36, who addressed the problem of how modern hydrogenotrophic methanogens synthesize formylmethanofuran at the highly endergonic formylmethanofuran dehydrogenase step

with urn:x-wiley:22115463:media:feb2s0014579311007101:feb2s0014579311007101-math-0027 59, and point out that the ferredoxin involved in reaction (10) is so far not characterized, whereby Clostridium pasteurianum ferredoxin with two reduced FeS clusters urn:x-wiley:22115463:media:feb2s0014579311007101:feb2s0014579311007101-math-0028 was used in their enzyme assays 36. In (over)simplified terms, the synthesis of formyl‐methanofuran with electrons from a reduced low potential ferredoxin (instead of from H2 directly) is not an energetic problem, but the generation of reduced low potential ferredoxin with electrons from H2 is, which is why many organisms use chemiosmotic coupling (ion influx) to reduce ferredoxin when the electrons stem from H2 59. So where on Earth does the Fdred for the formyl‐MFR dehydrogenase reaction come from?
Kaster et al. 36 show that the energetic problem posed by reaction (9) is solved by coupling the endergonic reaction (10) to a highly exergonic reaction (12) catalyzed by heterodisulfide reductase

with urn:x-wiley:22115463:media:feb2s0014579311007101:feb2s0014579311007101-math-0030 36, whereby CoM and CoB are the thiol cofactors coenzyme M and coenzyme B, respectively. The mechanism of coupling entails neither ATP nor chemiosmosis, it entails electron bifurcation. The soluble, cytoplasmic enzyme complex that catalyzes reaction (12) in Methanothermobacter marburgensis (the MvhADG/HdrABC complex) contains FAD as a cofactor, and one of the electrons in the reduced FAD (FADH2) goes in the direction of the highly exergonic reaction (12) while the other electron from FADH2 goes to a low potential ferredoxin in the direction of the endergonic reaction (10). Repeating those uphill and downhill electron routes gives the gray arrows in the scheme shown in Fig. 1 a which is redrawn in simplified form from Fig. 4 of Ref. 36.


Thus, the overall reaction of formyl‐MFR synthesis from H2 and CO2 is thermodynamically favorable because reaction (12) is still exergonic even when driving reaction (10) on the side. But this CO2‐fixing reaction, though ultimately driven by H2, requires Fdred to go forward efficiently, and the reduction of low potential ferredoxin with H2 requires energy input. That energy is gleaned, and conserved as Fdred, from more favorable steps later in methanogenesis.

Herrmann et al. 15 list several examples in which ferredoxin reduction is coupled to various exergonic reactions via electron bifurcation, and they suggest that electron bifurcation can be viewed as a third form of energy conservation, in addition to substrate level phosphorylation and chemiosmotic coupling. The principle of bifurcating electrons from a reduced cofactor to two different acceptors, one energetically uphill and the other energetically downhill, is not fundamentally new, because the same thing occurs with quinones in the Q‐cycle 79 at the cytochrome bc 1 complex of respiration and at the cytochrome b 6 f complex of photosynthesis 80. The idea that reduced ferredoxin is a currency of energy was formulated over four decades ago by Margaret Dayhoff, who wrote about ferredoxin from Clostridium pasteurianum 51:

This protein seems to have arisen at an earlier times than many others which have been studied. We draw this inference from the following considerations. (1) Ferredoxin occurs in primitive anaerobic organisms, both photosynthetic and non‐photosynthetic. It must have been present in simpler organisms, the extinct common ancestors of these. (2) Ferredoxin contains iron and sulfur, bonded to the protein at its active site. Ferrous sulfide, FeS, is a widely dispersed mineral, a catalyst which would have been readily available to the most primitive organism. (3) The functions of ferredoxin are basic to cell chemistry. The reduction of ferredoxin is the key photochemical event in photosynthesis by chloroplasts. All the energy is channeled through this compound to other cellular energy storage mechanisms. Ferredoxin is the most highly reducing stable compound so far found in the cell, having a reducing potential near that of molecular hydrogen. This suggests that its function may have evolved at a very early time when the earth's atmosphere was still strongly reducing. It reduces nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD), a ubiquitous reducing agent in the cell. Therefore, it may be even more primitive than NAD. It catalyzes adenosine triphosphate (ATP) formation by radiation. This indicates possible relation to primitive energy transfer processes. It catalyzes the synthesis of pyruvate from carbon dioxide and acetylcoenzyme‐A. This indicates its involvement with one of the simplest, most primitive synthetic processes in intermediary metabolism, the fixation of CO2. It participates in nitrogen fixation and hydrogenase‐linked reactions.

Dayhoff (then) expressed the (now) conventional wisdom that iron–sulfur centers represent catalytically active, inorganic relics from the mineral origins of life. Her comment that in photosynthesizers, all the energy is channeled through ferredoxin to other cellular energy storage mechanisms, now curiously applies to hydrogenotrophic methanogens, too. The downhill flow of electrons from Fdred in cyanobacteria and hydrogenotrophic methanogenesis harbors something very familiar, but the chemical means of generating Fdred could hardly be more different – photochemistry at photosystem I vs. electron bifurcation driven by (hetero‐)disulfide reduction. Proteins involved in electron bifurcation are turning up in an increasingly diverse spectrum of prokaryotic anaerobes 81, suggesting that this mechanism of generating low potential reduced ferredoxins is even more widespread than initially suspected.

7 Early bioenergetic evolution and electron bifurcation
The prevalence of electron bifurcation in the energy metabolism of clostridia and relatives 15, its prominent essentiality in hydrogenotrophic methanogens 36 as sketched in Fig. 1a, and its predicted significance for acetogens growing on H2 and CO2 73 as sketched in Fig. 1b and c, prompts a brief evolutionary reflection. Could the first free‐living cells really have lived from H2 and CO2 alone and was the Wood–Ljungdahl pathway really at the root of carbon and energy metabolism at an alkaline hydrothermal vent?

In hydrogenotrophic methanogens, carbon metabolism and energy metabolism are not independent of one another because the anabolic hydrogenases used for net carbon fixation depend upon the ion gradient generated from methane production 36. In acetogens the situation is very similar, net carbon and energy gain from H2 and CO2 are only possible through chemiosmosis 58, 82. In both physiological groups, the Wood–Ljungdahl pathway stands central. Assuming for the sake of argument that biochemistry and life did indeed arise at an alkaline hydrothermal vent 4, we can explore the sequence of events.

The universality of chemiosmotic coupling via ATP synthases among eubacteria and archaebacteria leaves little (or no) doubt that the first free‐living cells were able to harness ion gradients. The naturally chemiosmotic nature of alkaline hydrothermal vents – roughly pH 9–10 on the vent effluent side 21, 22 and roughly pH 6 in the Hadean ocean 83 leaves little doubt such proton gradients did exist at the vent‐ocean interface of Archean (>3.8 Ga old) alkaline serpentinizing systems. Geochemists furthermore tell us that serpentinization has been going on since there was water on Earth 42. So we can assume (safely) that chemiosmotic potential was available in alkaline hydrothermal settings before there were genes and proteins. But the view that naturally preexisting chemiosmotic potential could be harnessed in a biochemically relevant manner without the help of genetically specified proteins 84 is problematic for this author, who contends that we have to get to genes and proteins without bioenergetic help from chemiosmosis. Once genetically specified proteins exist, harnessing geochemically generated chemiosmotic potential is not a problem 4. But without proteins, the mechanism of coupling remains problematic.

The hydrothermal delivery of chemically reactive methyl groups, such as methyl sulfide, to the vent‐ocean interface could, in principle, solve the energetic problem presented by the synthesis of formyl pterins in a chemiosmosis‐independent manner 4 – we just leave the hard chemistry of reducing CO2 to higher temperature and pressure processes (serpentinization, Fe2+‐dependent reductions) deeper in the Earth's crust. The circumstance that Lost City effluent contains about 1 mM methane of a biogenic origin, derived from serpentinization 49, 60, 61, provides evidence supporting that view. But if all the hard chemistry of CO2 reduction is taking place 3–5 km deep in the Earth's crust, what use is the H2/CO2(H2 from serpentinization and very high marine CO2 levels from volcanoes) redox couple at the vent ocean interface? Electron bifurcation appears to provide the solution.

Electron bifurcation is a means to generate low potential Fdred in hydrogenotrophic methanogens (and probably acetogens 73) and Fdred appears to be the key compound linking carbon and energy metabolism in both groups, which lack cytochromes and quinones. At the kind of alkaline vent upon which the present considerations are founded, the business end of reduced ferredoxin – iron monosulfide – comprises the substance of the hydrothermal mound in which, for the purposes of this paper, the origin of gene and proteins is assumed to have taken place to begin with 4, 83. So naturally forming inorganic compartments consisting of freshly precipitated FeS in a highly reducing environment replete with H2 are not a problem, as they are hard wired into the model. But a chemistry that depends upon physical contact to a hydrothermal mound for catalysis and electrons can only go so far en route to free living cells. At some point electrons have to get from H2 to CO2 via proteins and cofactors. That requires electron bifurcation in modern methane and acetate producing biochemistry. Maybe the same was true at biochemical origins.

Can electron bifurcation possibly operate in the absence of aromatic cofactors such as FAD or quinones? It has been suggested 84 that other compounds in addition to quinones and FAD, including WIV, MoIV, and possibly even H2 might be capable of electron bifurcation, by virtue of their two‐electron donating redox reactions 85. Indeed, the entry of carbon into metabolism in acetogens and methanogens starts with W‐ (or Mo‐) dependent reactions. Formylmethanofuran dehydrogenase catalyzes the first CO2‐reducing step in methanogens, accepts electrons from Fdred, and requires either Mo or W 86. Formate dehydrogenase (FDH) in acetogens is a soluble enzyme that catalyzes the energetically unfavorable synthesis of formate from CO2 and NADPH 87 and requires W 88; the enzyme from other sources requires Mo 50; the enzymes in methanogens (formyl‐MRF dehydrogenase) and acetogens (FDH) share related components 54 even though they catalyze different reactions. Yet even if WIV and MoIV could provide electron‐bifurcating catalysis, what would serve as the exergonic reaction to permit the generation of Fdred from H2? Nitrogen oxides 83 is one suggestion, but neither methanogens nor acetogens require nitrogen oxides for growth. Geochemically delivered disulfides of simple organic thiols (such as methane thiol or similar), in analogy to the case of methanogens (Fig. 1a) would be another.

If so, that would explain why Wächtershäuser 26 was partially right concerning the claim that the half‐reaction (5) (H2 as a reductant) cannot reduce CO2. By itself, it probably cannot, but in the presence of simple organic disulfides, it certainly can in methanogens; the reoxidation of the thiols is achieved through an exergonic carbon reduction step (reduction of a methylthiol to methane). The implication is that in laboratory regimens the same should be true, because enzymes and cofactors do not make impossible reactions possible, they just allow reactions that tend to occur anyway to occur more rapidly. There can be no question that acetogens and methanogens do make cell mass out of H2, CO2, and (in diazotrophic forms) N2 and that the overall reaction is exergonic. But some individual steps can be steeply uphill, and the mechanistic details of how modern anaerobes that live from H2, N2, and CO2 overcome those hurdles ought to hold insights into the very ancient past.

Taking that thought one step further, and looking at Kaster et al.'s 36 scheme for energy metabolism in methanogens (Fig. 1a) in comparison to what the situation in acetogens might approximate (Fig. 1c), the simplicity of the methanogen pathway is striking. For generation of the ion gradient, no ATP is involved, no NAD(P)H is involved, not even thioesters or acyl phosphates. Were the methyl group transfer from H4MPT to CoM to be short circuited so as to omit ion pumping we would have an overall reaction identical to methane production at Lost City, which has its own natural pH gradient of ca. 10 (effluent) vs. ca. 8 (today's ocean). At face value, this simplicity speaks for a greater antiquity of methanogenesis (Fig. 1a) compared to the scheme for acetogenesis (Fig. 1c).

It is noteworthy that the acetogen Moorella thermoacetica encodes a heterodisulfide reductase of unknown function (HdrABC homologs of the M. marburgensis enzyme) directly next to the genes for acetyl‐CoA synthase 37 and genes with sequence similarity to the subunits HdrABC and MvrADG of the soluble M. marburgensis heterodisulfide reductase are readily found in database searches among firmicutes and other eubacteria that use the acetyl‐CoA pathway. Given that heterodisulfide reductase supports electron bifurcation in methanogens 36, its presence in acetogens raises the question of whether electron bifurcation plays more than one role in their carbon and energy metabolism. This issue is all the more pressing with regard to the path of electrons from H2 to CODH, which is sometimes said to entail Fdred 50, yet leaving the issue open whether chemiosmotic coupling is tapped to move electrons uphill from H2 to reduce ferredoxin, or whether electron bifurcation coupling might be used 36. This potential commonality between acetogens and methanogens points to a very ancient role for disulfide reduction in metabolism, as it might play a key role in the energetics of organisms other than methanogens 81. In the present context, the connection of disulfide reduction to CO2 reduction as outlined in Fig. 2 seems most important.

Only the energy metabolic routes are sketched in Fig. 1. Both groups have to assimilate net carbon via carbon monoxide dehydrogenase/acetyl CoA synthase (CODH/ACS), which accepts methyl groups from methyl‐H4MPT 85 or from methyl‐CFeSP (corrinoid iron sulfur protein 50), generates CO from CO2 with electrons (from H2, but via Fdred?), catalyzes condensation of the carbonyl and methyl groups to an enzyme bound acetyl group that is removed via thiolysis with CoASH yielding the thioester acetyl‐CoA 50. Although N2 fixation has not been shown for Lost City or similar vents, the transition metal nature of nitrogenase catalysis and laboratory results 90 suggest that it should, in principle, be possible.

In methanogens and acetogens, net energy conservation with concomitant net carbon assimilation from H2 and CO2 strictly depends upon chemiosmotic coupling 89, 91. Because chemiosmotic coupling requires proteins, the ability to harness natural chemiosmotic potential at a Hadean alkaline hydrothermal vent should be an genetic invention in the world of genes and proteins. Harnessing chemiosmotic potential also requires semipermeable membranes consisting of a hydrophobic barrier; such hydrophobics are today synthesized in metabolism, but in Lost City effluent alkanes up to pentane are detected 49, suggesting that abiotic synthesis of hydrophobic compounds in the Hadean capable of generating an organic membrane should not pose an insurmountable problem. Net carbon and energy gain through ancestral (inorganically catalyzed) versions of the Wood–Ljungdahl pathway entailing substrate level phosphorylation via thioesters and acyl phosphates 4 would appear possible at a Hadean hydrothermal vent, provided that chemically accessible methyl groups are delivered via serpentinization, for example in the form of methyl sulfide or similar. In that case, the origin of genes and proteins could have been energetically feasible based on soluble reactions (and with time, enzymatically catalyzed versions thereof) that do not require membrane‐associated chemiosmotic coupling. Electron bifurcation coupled to highly exergonic reactions without recourse to membrane potential is an alternative to chemiosmotic coupling for generating reduced ferredoxin, and probably represents a relic from the time of carbon and energy metabolism before there were free living cells. The involvement of electron bifurcation to reduce ferredoxin in the carbon and energy metabolism of clostridia 15, methanogens 26 and probably acetogens 73 speaks in favor of its antiquity. A rough general sketch for a possible sequence of stages in early carbon and energy metabolism is given in Fig. 2, the arrows indicate associations as much as flux.

8 Conclusion
Some modern cells overcome the energetically uphill reaction of generating low potential FeS clusters (ferredoxin) with electrons from H2 via electron bifurcation, it seem possible that early biochemical systems did as well. While modern electron bifurcation entails FAD (or quinones), there is room for (testable) speculation that simpler inorganic catalysts (transition metals) might have been able to do the job. In very early chemical evolution, the problem of whence reduced carbon has priority over whence RNA‐like bases, whose origin is conspicuously disregarded here. From thermodynamics, the synthesis of amino acids is the main energy releasing reaction when it comes to the synthesis of cell mass under reducing hydrothermal conditions 25, 45, their synthesis compensates for the endergonic synthesis of bases 25. In metabolism, the bases come from amino acids and carbamates 4, in early evolution a similar sequence can be envisaged. However, in the beginning there is just no way that base synthesis could have been highly specific. The early real RNA world (assuming it existed) must have consisted of messy bases synthesized spontaneously without the help of genes. The chemical environment at the heart of the present considerations is full of reactive C1 and methyl groups (on their way to becoming methane, acetyl groups and acetate), and it is noteworthy that ribosome–tRNA interactions at the heart of the genetic code will not work properly without the myriad base modifications in tRNA and rRNA, the vast majority of which are methylations 92. That a chemical imprint of the environment in which genes and proteins arose is preserved in the chemical structure of modern tRNA and rRNA bases is something to consider. Biological energy conservation, anaerobes, ferredoxin, and Fe–S proteins are topics that stood central in the interests of Antonio V. Xavier, to whose memory this volume is dedicated. It is hoped that he would have enjoyed this paper.
