Evolutionary patterns of phosphorylated serines
Abstract
Posttranslationally modified amino acids are chemically distinct types of amino acids and in terms of evolution they might behave differently from their non-modified counterparts. In order to check this possibility, we reconstructed the evolutionary history of phosphorylated serines in several groups of organisms. Comparisons of substitution vectors have revealed some significant differences in the evolution of modified and corresponding non-modified amino acids. In particular, phosphoserines are more frequently substituted to aspartate and glutamate, compared to non-phosphorylated serines.

Findings
Post-translational modifications play an important role in diversifying protein structure and function [1,2]. Protein phosphorylation is one of the most important and widely distributed types of post-translational modifications. In eukaryotes, reversible protein phosphorylation plays a key role in the signal transduction and other processes [3,4]. Recent advances in mass spectrometry allowed for large-scale identification of phosphorylation events [5]. Analyses of these data have already revealed some specific structural and evolutionary features of phosphoserines. Phosphoserines tend to occur in intrinsically disordered regions [6-8] and regions corresponding to alternatively spliced gene segments [9]. Phosphorylated amino acids are more conserved than their non-phosphorylated counterparts [7,10-12]. Some very old phosphorylation events potentially can be common to organisms from Archaea to human [10].

Here we investigated another evolutionary aspect of protein modification sites. Since modified amino acids chemically are a distinct type of amino acids, in terms of evolution they might behave differently from their non-modified counterparts (on the top of the different level of conservation). To analyse differences in the evolution of standard amino acids and their modified counterparts, we reconstructed the evolution of phosphorylated amino acids in three groups of organisms. Particularly, we studied phosphorylation of serine in the human, fruit fly and yeast proteomes.

Phosphorylation sites were downloaded from the PHOSIDA [7] and PhosphoPEP [13] databases. For yeast and fruit fly we studied phosphoserines obtained in two high-throughput experiment each, by different groups of researchers [13-16]. For human we used datasets obtained in four different high-through experiments [17-20]. Phosphorylation is highly dynamic process, and the overlap of phosphorylation events identified in different experiments from various cell lines and tissues is relatively small. Sites observed to be phosphorylated in more than one high-througput experiment likely are modified in a more constitutive manner, or at least represent a more reliable dataset of phosphoserines.

We analysed the evolution of modification sites and their non-modified counterparts separately among eight vertebrates (human Homo sapiens; chimpanzee Pan trogolodytes; mouse Mus musculus; rat Rattus norvegicus; cow Bos taurus; dog Canis lupus familiaris; chicken Gallus gallus; and zebrafish Danio rerio), eleven fruit flies (Drosophila melanogaster; D. yakuba; D. erecta; D. sechecellia; D. ananassae; D. pseudoobscura; D. persimilis; D. wilistoni; D. mojavensis; D. virilis; D. grimshawi) and fifteen fungi (Saccharomyces cerevisiae; S. paradoxus; S. mikatae; S. bayanus; Candida glabrata; S. castelli; Kluyveromyces waltii; K. lactis; Ashbya gossypii; Debaryomyces hansenii; C. albicans; Yarrowia lipolytica; Aspergillus nidulans; Neurospora crassa; Schizosaccharomyces pombe). Orthologs of modified H. sapiens proteins were obtained from HomoloGene [21]; for D. melanogaster, from FlyBase [22]; and for S. cerevisiae, from FungalOrthogroups [23]. Only orthologs with the highest identity to the modified protein were selected from each species. Multiple alignments were constructed using ClustalW [24].

As mentioned above, the evolutionary features and frequencies of phosphoserines may depend on structural context. Especially, phosphoserines tend to occur within intrinsically disordered regions of proteins [6-8]. To take this into account, we analysed serines from disordered regions and ordered regions of phosphoproteins separately. Intrinsically disordered regions were predicted by PONDR VSL2 [25].

For each phosphorylated serine, we have reconstructed the evolution of this site in the corresponding taxonomical group using a fast modification of the maximum likelihood algorithm (A. Goland, in preparation). Since we cannot reconstruct the moment in evolution when a residue had become modified, we assumed that it coincides with the oldest residue of the given type in a given tree (Figure ​(Figure1).1). Then we calculated the number of substitutions of ancestral putative modification sites to other amino acids, and calculated the vectors of substitution frequencies.

Only a fraction of phosphoserines from the initial datasets were aligned to other types of amino acids in our data, and very small number of them occurred in ordered regions. Thus further analyses were performed only for serines from regions predicted to be intrinsically disordered. The final datasets of phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated serines included only sites that experienced at least one substituition to other types of amino acids and originated from disordered regions of phosphoproteins (Table ​(Table1).1). Some phosphorylation events were observed in more than one experiment, and this subset was also analyzed separately.

The control sets consisted of non-modified serine residues from disordered regions of the same proteins. To measure the statistical significance of the difference between substitution vectors of modified and non-modified serines we performed bootstraping of control sets. To do that that, we generated 10000 random control sets of non-phosphorylated serines. Each control set was of the same size as the corresponding phosphorylated set (generic sets and subsets of reliable phophosites).

Structural features of phosphoserines may not be limited to disorder of surrounding protein regions, and may include other specific properties such as secondary structures, solvent availability etc. Therefore, to maximally eliminate the confounding effects, we created additional control sets containing non-modified serines located at the same protein regions as modification sites. Non-modified serines, was collected at the maximal distance of 10, 11 and 9 amino acid residues from phosphoserines, for yeast, fruit fly and human respectively. Again, the size of the control sets was the same as the size of the respective phosphoserine sets.

Differences in the substitution vectors between phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated serines from disordered regions varied among different groups of organism, but some trends were stable and significant (Figure ​(Figure2).2). Rather unexpectedly, we did not observe any preference for substitution of phosphoserines to other aminoacids that may be phosphorylated, that is as threonine and tyrosine. At the same time, phosphorylation converts serine into a negatively charged amino acid, and, as one can see in Figure ​Figure22 in all three datasets phosphoserines are more frequently substituted to aspartate and glutamate than non-phosphorylated serines. In both cases the substitution rates of phosphoserines are much higher than in all bootstraps of control sets (P-value << 10-4). In the case of the more reliable subsets of phosphoserines observed in several experiments, the subtitution rate to aspartate and glutamate is even higher, and also lies outside the interval of bootstraps that in this case is wider, as the sample size is smaller. At that, artificial substitution of serine to aspartate and glutamate, called phosphomimetic mutation, is widely used to confirm phosphorylation of serine [26,27].

There are considerable other shifts of substitution rates common to all three taxa. Particularly, phosphoserines are relatively rarely substituted to alanines and cysteines (Figure ​(Figure2).2). However, in these cases, the control-set substitution vectors of non-phosphorylated serines located in the same regions as phosphoserines were also shifted in the same direction as phosphoserines (as compared to all non-phosphorylated serines). Hence, these shifts are likely related not to modifications, but to specific features of these regions.

The rates of substitutions to aspartate and glutamate in the additional control sets of nearest non-phosphorylated serines also are not shifted, with the exception of vertebrates where they are also shifted toward higher values (but still to a much weaker extent than in case of phosphoserines). Note that these control sets may be contaminated by phosphoserines. Indeed, phosphoserines tends to co-occur, forming clusters [28]. Therefore the sets of nearest non-phosphorylated serines likely contain phosphoserines which were not detected yet. Removing these phosphoserines would increase the significance of our observations.

The comparison with nearest non-phosphorylated serines takes into account the fact that phosphoserines tend to occur in intrinsically disordered regions. Methods used in large-scale phosphoproteomic experiments are based on selection of negatively charged peptides which results in a bias towards enrichment of phosphopeptides with acidic residues [29,30]. This fact, coupled with the fact that phosphoserines may shift positions within rapidly evolving disordered regions [31] and general problems of alignments of such regions could distort our analysis. But this would have the same influence on our control sets of non-modified serines from the same regions of proteins. Hence the observed differences between these controls and phosphoserines cannot be explained by such artifacts.

In addition to serine phosphorylation, we analysed the evolution of another abundant type of protein modification, lysine acetylation. Recently two large datasets of human acetylation sites became available [32,33]. We observed some differences between substitution vectors of acetylated and non-acetylated lysines, but the results obtained for these two sets of acetyllysines were discordant (data not shown). As noted in one of these papers [32], the spectrum of acetylated proteins is different between these two datasets obtained from different tissues. We observed that less than 2% of sites are common for both datasets. It is seems that the available acetyllysine data are not sufficient for meaningful analysis.

It should be taken into account that our substitution vectors are probably enriched with false-positive phosphosites. This results from of our over-simplified assumption that a site is modified from the first appearance of the corresponding residue in the evolutionary record. Additionally, phosphoserines from large-scale experiments may be false-positive sites. There is evidence that many phosphorylation sites could be non-functional or non-specific, as sometimes functional targets of phosphorylation are not particular sites, but entire protein regions [31,34,35]. On the other hand, the control sets could contain not yet detected phosphoserines. These false positives and false negatives should blur the differences between the substitution vectors of modified and non-modified residues. Most likely, the real level of differences is higher than the one observed here.