Computer prediction of the exon-intron structure of mammalian pre-mRNAs.
ABSTRACT
A novel approach to the problem of prediction of
protein-coding regions is suggested. This approach
combines the site prediction methods to predict
splicing sites and the global coding region prediction
methods to choose the best variant of spliced mRNA.
One of the advantages of the suggested algorithm is
that the resulting mRNA or protein sequence may then
be immediately analyzed further. The true mRNA either
coincides with the predicted one or ranks high in the
list of variants. In the latter situation the predicted
mRNA usually differs from the true one in only one or
two of several exons.
The combined approach allows the use of a priori
information (e.g. the putative protein length or the
number of exons). It is possible to use additional
parameters not considered here, such as the preferred
lengths of exons and introns, and particularly the
preferred position of introns in the reading frame and
the preferred codon position of exon termini.

INTRODUCTION
The prediction of protein-coding regions is the first and perhaps
the most important step in the computer analysis of a newly
sequenced DNA. Currently two approaches to this problem exist.
The global approach uses the fact that the coding function puts
statistical constraints on a nucleotide sequence. Thus one may
use patterns of the codon usage [1-5], positional mono- and
oligonucleotide frequencies and weak 3-periodicity [6-9] to
distinguish between protein-coding and non-coding regions
(review and some other references see in [10]. Usually the sliding
windows technique is employed. We invent a function that
evaluates some of those characteristics and then, moving a
window of a fixed length along the analyzed sequence, plot the
protein-coding potential of sequence regions. If the function is
good, then peaks and high plateaus of the plot would correspond
to the coding regions, while deeps and low plateaus coincide with
the non-coding regions. The other possibility is to evaluate the
coding potential of open reading frames. Unfortunately this
approach performs poorly in analysis of the sequences interrupted
by introns. In these cases we cannot define an open reading frame.
On the other hand, exons often are shorter than the window
length, which cannot be too small due to the ever-present
statistical noise.

The local methods predict start codons and splicing sites using
the non-uniformity of nucleotide distribution in certain positions
near these points ([11-22], reviewed in [23]). However, none
of the existing methods of functional sites prediction is reliable
enough. We either get a lot of false positives, or lose some true
sites. In both cases the resulting set of predicted sites cannot be
used immediately to predict the spliced mRNA. Shapiro and
Senapathy tried to overcome this obstacle by using the information
about open reading frames [15]. They developed scoring functions
for donor and for acceptor sites based on the positional nucleotides
frequencies and (for acceptor sites) on the length of the
polypyrimidine tract. Ten sites of both types with the highest
scores were considered (it should be noted, that in all examples
given in [15] some sites are missed by this procedure). The region
between an acceptor site and the nearest downstream donor site
was marked as a possible exon if at least one of reading frames
in this region was open. Then the regions with consistent open
reading frames were chosen. Nothing is said about prediction
of the first (starting not at the acceptor site) and the last (closing
the reading frame) exons. In any case, almost all exons were
found, but several additional exons were predicted.

This procedure is a serious improvement over the previously
known ones, which result in a uninterpretable set of predicted
sites. However it has some serious drawbacks. First, as noted
previously, we cannot guarantee that all true sites, both donor
and acceptor, are among the ten, and even hundred, highest
scoring ones. The exon corresponding to the missed acceptor site
will be missed also, while the exon corresponding to the missed
donor site either will be missed or will have a spurious right
border. This latter situation will also happen if there is a falsely
predicted donor site between the acceptor site and the
corresponding true donor site (some examples, albeit with another
scoring function, can be seen in [21]). If the length of the missed
exon, or the distance between the true exon-intron border and
the predicted one is not divisible by 3, then the consequences
of such an error may be fatal for the prediction of the downstream
exons, because in this case the reading frame of these exons would
be misidentified.

Trifonov delineated regions, where intron borders are expected,
using global approach, and then tried to choose pairs of
corresponding donor and acceptor sites from two sets of predicted
sites presuming base-pairing of 5' and 3' ends of an intron [ 13].
However, it seemes, that this assumption has no biological
justification.

Nakata, Kanehisa, and DeLisi predicted splice sites using both
local (perceptron value and energy of base-pairing with Ul and
U2 snRNA) and global (nucleotide distribution and 3-periodicity
measured by a Fourier transform-like procedure) parameters [ 14]. While the perceptron value was essential, the use of the global
parameters improved results of the classification.
Finally we should mention the paper by Stormo, in which an
informal combination of global and local approaches is described
[24].

Thus both approaches fail when used independently. The global
approach cannot deal with the DNA possessing an exon-intron
structure since it misses short exons and does not predict the
required sharply defined boundaries of the coding regions, while
the local approach finds most sites and some false sites but offers
no means for further analysis.

These difficulties can be overcome by the combined technique
described below. The main idea of the method is as follows. First
we use a functional site-prediction function to find all possible
sites. The conditions to which the putative site should satisfy are
deliberately made rather weak, so as not to miss any true site,

while many false positives are allowed and will be dealt with
on the next stage. All possible variants of spliced mRNA are
considered and for each of these its coding potential (in the global
approach sense) is evaluated and combined with the mean score
of the donor and of the acceptor sites of this variant. The
combined scoring function is used to choose the best variant.
METHODS
Donor and acceptor splicing sites were predicted using the Bergvon Hippel discrimination energy [25] with the previously
obtained parameters (general results see in [21]; parameters are
given in [22] or available upon request). Protein-coding potential
was evaluated using the TestCode algorithm by Fickett [6] with
the parameters given there, which happened to be the best
algorithm for classification of mammalian exon and intron
sequences among the several tested ones (mentioned in the
Introduction; results of comparing are described in detail in [10]).
It should be noted, that the discrimination energies D and A
of donor and acceptor sites respectively are low for the sites
predicted to be strong, while TestCode values C for the proteincoding sequences generally are higher than for the non-coding
ones.
The following calculated previously parameters will be used:
mean discrimination energy of donor sites MD = 3.86, its
standard deviation SD = 2.39, mean discrimination energy of
acceptor sites MA = 6.17, its standard deviation SA = 2.62,
mean TestCode value for exon sequences MC = 105.6, its
standard deviation DC = 18.0 [10, 21 ].
All programs were written in the C programming language
using the Microsoft QuickC Compiler version 1.0 and Microsoft
C Optimizing Compiler version 5.0, and run under MS-DOS on
an IBM-compatible personal computer Commodore PC 10-HI.
ALGORITHM
All sites containing the invariant dinucleotides GU (for donor
sites) and AG (for acceptor sites) are considered and their
strengths D and A are evaluated (we have used the functions that
have low values for the strong sites). The sites satisfying the
conditions D c Dn.. and A c A. together with their scoring
functions are retained (the choice of the parameters Dx and
Amax is discussed below). In this study we have also used the
condition that the energy of the base-pairing of the donor site
with the U1 snRNA (calculated by the rules described in [21])
should not exceed the observed maximum value -6.9 kcal/mole.
In what follows we presume the knowledge of the start codon.
If this is not the case (as in most of the real situations), we should
also score all possible start codons. To do it, it is necessary to
develop a prediction function for these sites. It falls outside the
scope of this paper.

Thus the two sets of putative sites are formed. Then all possible
variants of splicing are considered. This search is governed by
the following parameters: minimum exon length (Lin = 1
throughout), minimum intron length (LI n = 80 unless stated
otherwise), and minimum protein-coding mRNA length Lmin.
For each variant we evaluate its coding potential RC and mean
scores of its donor sites RD and its acceptor sites RA. Here we
used the simplest way to combine these values, which is to express
them in the standard deviation units and sum:
R = (RC-MC)/SC + (MD-RD)ISD + (MA-RA)ISA.

The variants with the highest combined score are retained and
may be used for further analysis (usually they do not differ much).
RESULTS
We have tested the algorithm on the several sequences taken from
the GenBank release 48.0. We have ranked splicing variants
according to their combined scores and evaluated the result of
the prediction by the two parameters: (1) how much the variant
with the higher score R. coincides with the true spliced
mRNA, and (2) the rank of the true mRNA, i.e. the number
of the variants that satisfy the condition R 2 Rtrue. The results
are given on fig. 1 and in tab. 1.
Splicing of the human metallothionein (HUMMET2 [26],
fig. la) and beta-globin (HUMBGL3, fig. Ib) genes was predicted
correctly.

Two exons were lost and additional minor errors made in the
mouse interleukin gene (MUSIL3B [27], fig.ic). The correct
version was ranked 12th. However, it was the best one among
the 5-exon variants.

The last exon of the rat gamma-crystalline gene (RATCRYG
[28], fig. 1d) was lost because of its low-ranking acceptor site
(A = 8.97, ranked 12th). The correct mRNA is ranked 5th. The
highest ranking 3-exon variant (ranked 2) uses for the last exon
an acceptor site with A = 7.63 (ranked 4th), that is situated 87
nucleotides downstream of the true one, so that the reading frame
of this exon is not changed.

Two exons with the lengths divisible by 3 were lost in the rat
myeline gene (RATMYL2G [29], fig. le). The correctly spliced
mRNA is ranked 4th and is the best 7-exon variant. The
comparison of several best variants shows that the inclusion of
the 2nd exon lowers the coding potential, while the 4th exon is
lost because of its rather bad acceptor site (A = 9.30, ranked
11th).

The terminal 6th and 7th exons of the rat chemotrypsin gene
(RATCTPRB [30], fig. If) were lost due to their unfavorable
influence on the coding potential. The correct version is ranked
15th. The best 7-exon variant uses a spurious donor site with
D = 5.75 instead of the correct one (D = 6.15) for the 4th exon,
that thus is 18 nucleotides shorter than in reality.
We have also studied some sequences for which bad results
could be expected. We believe that careful analysis of the failures
might show the direction for further development of the
algorithm.

The rat skeletal muscle actin gene (RATACSKA [31], fig. ig)
has a donor site that had the worst score in the learning set
(D = 11.69, ranked 21th) [21]. As expected, the corresponding
4th exon has been lost, as well as the following exon, which has
a rather poor acceptor site (A = 9.97, ranked 13th).
Consequently the last exon was read in the shifted reading frame.
Two spurious donor sites were used instead of weaker correct
ones (the length of the fragments added to the 1st exon and
missing from the 4th one are both divisible by 3). The correct
version is ranked 168th, that is rather low. However, there are
only 6 6-exon variants with higher ranks. Studying this gene we
used L I = 70 because the length of the 5th intron is 76 bp.
If the usual L I = 80 threshold is used, there are 211648
variants, 133 of which have R > Rme

The human HLA class I gene (HUMMH [32], fig. lh) has an
abnormally bad acceptor site in the 3rd exon (same is true for
the homologous genes [15, 21]). We studied this sequence using
the condition A.. = 9 that leaves this site out of consideration.
As expected, the 3rd exon was not discovered. The two relatively
short 3'-terminal exons have been lost also, seemingly because
they influence unfavorably the coding potential. However, the
major part of the coding region has been found.

Finally, we have studied the sequence RATMT12C that
contains two rat metallothionein genes ([33], fig. Ii). As in several
previous cases, the highest ranked variant misses the last intron.
The true variant is ranked 9th. However, the variant ranked 2nd
consists of the 1st exon of the first gene joined with the consequent
introns of the second gene. Moreover, the variants with
R > Rtemostly consist of the true exons of the two genes in
different combinations.
DISCUSSION
We believe that the performance of the described algorithm may
be considered as satisfactory (though definitely not excellent).
While the highest scoring (i.e. predicted) variant often misses
one or several exons, the true variant is usually among the several
best ones.

It seems that the method tends to miss fragments of the coding
sequence rather than to mark as coding those regions that in reality
do not encode a protein fragment. The errors are predominantly
of three types. First a spurious site may be used if its score is
significantly better than the score of the true site, and moreover
the distance between the two sites is a multiple of 3. Secondly,
a whole exon may be missed if it has a low-scoring site at one
of its boundaries or if positional nucleotide preferences in it differ
from these in the rest of the gene, while the length of the missed
exon as before is a multiple of 3. Thirdly, major errors can occur
in the terminal exons, including even a shifting of a reading frame
in the last exon (though in a small region) or a spurious last exon
(also small).

Some of these problems seem to be hopeless. Unless we devise
an extremely powerful methods for prediction of splicing sites
and/or coding regions, it would be impossible to predict a small,
or even medium-sized, exon of the length divisible by 3 bounded
by weak sites, or to discriminate between two nearby sites.
The more powerful site prediction methods are also necessary
to reduce the number of the suspect sites and thus to reduce the
number of considered variants. The number of variants depends
not only on the number of sites, but also on the relative positions
of these and the stop codons (compare, for example, these
numbers for RATACSKA and RATMT12C). We sometimes had
to use more severe conditions than the conditions D c 12 and
A c 13, that describe all donor and virtually all acceptor sites
in the learning set [21]. We believe that this has not influenced
the ranks of the best variants (indeed, the transition to the used
conditions from the even more strict ones brought virtually no
changes to the set of the higher scoring variants, data not shown).
However, to study longer sequences with no a priori information
it is desirable to use weak conditions, while it may be necessary
to decrease the number of the putative sites so that to make the
search possible. It may be useful to put additional restrictions
on the putative acceptor sites, as we have done to the donor sites.
For example, we may require the absence of the upstream AG
dinucleotides [15, 16, 21].

The search may be accelerated by not considering the variants
with the hopelessly bad mean donor and mean acceptor sites
scores RD and RA. Furthermore, it may be convenient to use
pre-calculated coding potentials (or the required statistical
characteristics) of all possible exons, so that the combined score
of each variant would be evaluated more quickly.
The other direction of improvement lies in the use of other
parameters. We believe that the information of the preferred exon
and intron length [34-36] and of the preferred position of the
exon-intron boundaries relative to the reading frames [37] would
be helpful. The start codon should be predicted using the rules
that describe the region surrounding it [38]. All these parameters
may be easily incorporated into the combined predictor R
following the usual scheme.

All sorts of the a priori information are welcome, especially
the information of the protein length and the number of the exons.
As it can be easily seen from the above analysis, the knowledge
of the number of the exons greatly improves the prediction results.
Estimates of the coding sequence length may be incorporated into
the combined score using the Gaussian term, that depends on
the variant length. The parameters of this function should depend
on the estimate (the mean) and on the certainty of the estimate
(the standard deviation).
