The work of Cserzo and associates presents a statistical analysis of rare sequence motifs in the human genome. They find that the rare sequence motives, termed spanions cluster in the vicinity of RNA pol II and tiRNA binding sites. These interesting observations shed light to a relatively less known property of genomic sequences which certainly deserves systematic analysis. The central concept of this work is the role of rare motifs. In my opinion the statistical analysis of rare motifs is a particularly important topic. According to the working hypothesis of this work, rare motifs carry specific functions. The naive reader expects that rare motifs should coincide with promoters and other protein binding sites. In contrast, the present work shows that rare motifs cluster around various other binding sites, notably tiRNA and RNA pol II binding sites, which points to the currently perhaps underestimated - role of the latter in regulatory events.

1) The present analysis is based on direct enumeration of bipartie motives consisting of two hexanucleotides connected with a spacer of varying length. It is not clear to me whether the bipartite motives are chosen because of their similarity of transcription factor binding sites or because of their "enumerability". Namely, direct enumeration of DNA motives is a computationallly hard problem which can be apparently solved on this particular subset. While addressing this question in the manuscript the authors may also comment on the percentage of the motif space they analyze so that the reader can get an impression about the generality of the conclusions.

2) The authors may consider showing a few representative examples of the avoided motifs, motif clusters and give more detailes on how the motif clusters are defined. Also some of the conclusions (e.g.) could be supported by more statistical details given as supplementary information. For instance, a list of spanion clusters for the human and mouse genomes could be given as an appendix.

3) Finally, some of the conclusions I found particularly interesting are not mentioned in the present version of the abstract. The abstract would definitely benefit from a thorough brush-up, according to the guidelines of the Journal.