The manuscript by Vaškovi#ová et al., poses an interesting evolutionary and functional question, namely whether the mechanisms of cell invasive growth in plants and animals share homologous molecular components. The study is the review of the evidence, which gives an affirmative answer: the examples of cell invasion that are selected for the review are all dependent on the rearrangements of actin cytoskeleton, controlled by small GTPases of Rho, ARF and Rab families. Moreover, in both plants and animals the lipid (phosphoinositol) signalling is involved, as well as possibly membrane microdomains.

I have no objection against publication of this review as is, but the authors are invited to consider whether some of the following modifications would improve the manuscript.

First, the definition of invasive growth is, in my opinion, loose. Invasion surely implies growing through, or within, another living tissue; the authors suggest that much, pointing out the importance of the digestion of the intercellular matrix, for which the appropriate enzymes should be secreted. If this is a necessary part of the definition, then pollen tube growth qualifies, but the growth of root hairs seems not to: secretion of “lubricants” is surely not the same as secretion of active lytic enzymes, or is it - lubricants do not have even to be proteins? On the other hand, growth of haustoria of parasitic plants seem to qualify in every way.

Secretion of both the digestive enzymes and other materials such as the root hair mucilage (i.e. polysaccharides, glycoproteins) or even small molecules critically depends on a local activity of the exocytotic pathway, and at least in this sense the inclusion of root hairs can be justified. From this point of view, we would not consider the haustoria a relevant model for cellular invasiveness, as they are multicellular structures.

Second, the (near) absence of fungi in the discussion is puzzling. Surely, if root hairs qualify, fungal hyphae should too; but even if not, the growth of parasitic fungi is invasive, and, at least in the case of Candida and some plant parasites even reasonably well studied genetically. In fact, the names of many genes involved in the process, notably Cdc42, are from the fungal systems!

Third, if at least some components of the invadopodia are shared between plants and animals - and also fungi, if the authors will be willing to talk about them, too - then an inference is that these components were also present in LECA. Were they organized into a coherent system, and what that system might have been?

A putative answer presents itself, i.e., these components, including cortical/apical actin cytoskeleton, GTP regulators, and associated membrane remodeling components may have been involved in forming pseudopodia and other cytoplasmic protrusions. In fact, among such protrusions in any organisms, the best-studied one from genetic point of view may be S.cerevisiae bud, which is very much controlled by Cdc42 and other players discussed in the review. It seems to be worth discussing the present-day unicellular eukaryotes more explicitly, even though they are obviously not LECA.