The study by Wood et al. reports the results of re-prediction, by Glimmer3, of the open reading frames in the majority of finished bacterial genomes and identifying such of these genes that have been missed by earlier genome annotation efforts. The protein-level sequence similarity to the database proteins is used as a criterion of the reality, which is further elaborated by taking into account the experimental knowledge about the homologs of the predicted gene products. The COMBREX database, which holds and curates this knowledge, is discussed, and examples of database queries that have to do with antibiotics resistance and gene essentiality and help guide experiments are given. The study also collected statistics concerning missed genes in genome annotations. For example, the average number of missed conserved genes per annotated genome appears to be about 10, this average varies between 2 and 13 depending on the sequencing center, large sequencing centers are better than small teams - presumably, because of the more robust annotation pipelines and better staffed bioinformatics department - and genes missed by all centers tend to be on the shorter side - evidently, in part because of the arbitrary length cutoffs imposed by many genome annotation efforts.

COMBREX is a useful resource, set up in such a way as to involve the scientific community in improving annotation of bacterial gene function. This is worth highlighting. On the other hand, my perfunctory attempts to find new predictions, i.e., previously missed but now restored to being, genes by querying http://combrex.bu.edu/ failed - is there a way to do it, and should it not be provided simultaneously with the submission of a paper that talks about such genes?

A technical comment: on p. 4, we read: "For those candidate missed genes with homology only to hypothetical proteins, we needed additional information to determine if they were indeed genes." and again on p. 7: "it is likely that a significant fraction of such genes [i.e., those passing three reasonably restrictive filters, after sequence similarity has been established in the first place - AM] are not true genes". In both cases, it is not clear to me what the alternative to these ORFs being true genes may be - they could be pseudogenes of course, but the authors address this separately. Then, on p. 8, the authors suggest an alternative for the special case of very closely related strains, when the conservation of a spurious ORF can be an artifact of similar k-mer distribution (I suppose, even more trivially in this case, this could be a result of very high overall nucleotide-level sequence similarity). Right away, however, the authors remark that if an ORF is conserved in more genomes, and, better yet, in several relatively diverse evolutionary lineages, then it is most likely not spurious. But since the ORFs in question were identified by sequence similarity in the first place, one would think that a simple filter on the taxonomic closeness or even percent identity (not too high in either case) would take care of the problem? More generally, and in line with the authors' approach, it would be useful to have a rule of thumb such as "an ORF with a homolog separated by evolutionary distance X has an Y percent chance not to be spurious" - most likely, the authors already have data on hand to address this?

p. 8 and Table ​Table1:1: replace "significant homology" with "significant similarity".