The manuscript by Boratyn et al. describes a new addition to the BLAST family of programs. The main idea of DELTA-BLAST is to start sequence comparisons with matching the query sequence not to the individual homologous sequences in the peptide database (as PSI-BLAST does), but to models of conserved sequence domains in the domain database (in this case, the NCBI CDD database), and to build a probabilistic family model (PSSM) from the alignment of the query to highly-scoring domain model. The PSSM is then submitted to a round of sequence database search, same as in PSI-BLAST. The majority of the manuscript is devoted to benchmarking the performance of DELTA-BLAST against PSI-BLAST and CS-BLAST (an approach, developed by J. Soding’s group, similar to DELTA-BLAST but relying on the library of patterns that is shorter and may be less well curated than CDD).

The authors have outstanding track record in improving methods of sequence database search, and I am sure that DELTA-BLAST, too, will find its uses. I feel, however, that the paper’s focus on benchmarking leaves several more substantive questions not very well answered. My concerns are along three lines, i.e., what is the scientific problem that DELTA-BLAST is aimed at solving; why does it work; and how it is integrated with the suite of other BLAST programs.

One goal of the effort seems to be finding more homologs of a given query than in PSI-BLAST searches. Is that indeed so? In the later sections of the Results and in Discussion, we also see notes on better alignment quality in DELTA-BLAST, and on the ability of DELTA-BLAST to classify the query sequence (“classify” is not defined – does this mean “detect a CD that is the closest match to the query”? Obviously, that would be not the same as to say that the query is an in group of that CD family – it may be an out group). Which of these goals are primary, and which are more of auxiliary benefits?

A related concern is: why aligning a query to a PSSM of of matching conserved domains is a better first step in the search strategy (better in the most important sense, i.e., ensuring better sensitivity) than building a PSSM from matching sequences, as PSI-BLAST does? Sometimes the first BLAST search of sequence databases produces no above-the-threshold similarities, and therefore nothing to build a PSSM with, whereas RPS-BLAST gives a significant match to one or more CDs, enabling one to construct a PSSM; I understand that in these cases, DELTA-BLAST would be more sensitive than PSI-BLAST. But many other times, the CD to which query actually belongs has not been described yet and is not in CDD, and yet PSI-BLAST is finding some homologs in the database, allowing a PSSM construction and iterative search. In these cases, PSI-BLAST is sensitive and DELTA-BLAST is moot.

“Additionally, because CDD search is more sensitive than sequence search, DELTA-BLAST achieves better performance at finding appropriate models to construct a PSSM. Furthermore, manually curated MSAs are less likely to be corrupted by false positive matches as can be the case for a PSI-BLAST PSSM built on the fly. Many query sequences match more than one CD, allowing DELTA-BLAST to build a composite PSSM that may be more effective than the PSSMs associated with individual matching CDs. For sequences that do not match to any CDs, DELTA-BLAST performs a BLASTP search that can be iterated with PSI-BLAST.”

For queries that do not match any CDs, our initial small scale experiments suggested that it is beneficial in some cases to construct a PSSM using possibly non-homologous segments of CDs. This can be done by increasing DELTA-BLAST’s domain inclusion E-value threshold (a user controlled parameter). This requires more thorough research that we plan to do in the future. Furthermore, if a query does not match any CDs, DELTA-BLAST defaults to PSI-BLAST.

Was the testing described in the study done on the sequences that mostly followed the former scenario? If so, why? Is a random subset of sequences from protein database dominated by sequences that are already assigned to CD?

The performance was tested on a relatively small set of queries and relatively small database, and it is possible that both are indeed strongly enriched by sequences with known domain composition. Have there been any tests that mimic other common use cases, e.g., the set of queries is a complete list of proteins encoded by newly sequenced genomes, or the database is NR or all proteins encoded by genomes in GenBank Genome division? Would the gain in sensitivity by DELTA-BLAST be the same?

Finally, it would be helpful to describe better the software offering — is it integrated with other BLAST programs in any way? Most immediately, if there are no matching CD, will the program default to PSI-BLAST automatically?