I have read the manuscript by Valas and Bourne with considerable interest, wholeheartedly agreeing with several ideas in it and disagreeing with some. The best home for this study is probably in the Opinion category within Biology Direct - this is not really a research paper.

There are two main themes, one of which is more of a research proposal, the other more of a philosophy-of-science talking point. The research proposal is essentially to enhance the utility of genic traits by assigning weights to them - the weights which, directly or indirectly, estimate relative contribution of each gene to the phenotype; if I understand the proposal correctly, the significance of the phylogenetics signal can therefore be reordered by the "functional rank" of the sequence from which this signal was obtained. I think this is a good proposal, and Adami/Wilke and Koonin's groups, among others, have already said a lot about gene "relative importance"; important technical details of all that have not been worked out, however. The more methodological question, of what to make out of the purported lack of tree-like signal, or of the Doolittle and Bapteste's "pattern pluralism" and other related proposals, is also of interest, and my intuition runs close to the author's, but I still think that he is led astray by the setups of the problem in the literature.

In more detail, much of the "conceptual" literature on the HGT is hand waving about "rampant", "massive" etc. aspects of horizontal transfer. This usually refers to the large number of events observed in a particular dataset, but generally fails to acknowledge that this high number of events usually accounts for a small proportion of the genes in the dataset and correspondingly relatively low average ratio of horizontal to vertical branches in the trees. (Ninety-nine percent of the trees, for example, may show some evidence of HGT, but in the vast majority of these trees, there may be just one or very few HGT events, and so on; see, e.g., Pubmed 19077245, 18062816 and 15799709). Thus, instead of talking about the applicability of the TOL "metaphor", perhaps we should be talking about TOL quantitative model, the alternatives to it, and which model or mixed model is best compatible with the data.

The author states about Doolittle and Bapteste's proposal: "A key point of their work is that any data can be forced to fit a tree, even if that representation of the data makes no sense" - in fact, this has been known for a long time; the same can be said about any representation of the evolutionary process (e.g., alignment algorithm will align even unrelated sequences, and network algorithm will build a network even on a hierarchical set of OTUs); and finally, so what?

In other words, the author should stop fighting the windmills: the goal of phylogenetics should not be to build a tree, nor to build any graph with another kind of predetermined topology, but to improve our understanding of which evolutionary events actually happened and led to the observed data. I think this accommodates "pattern pluralism" naturally.

I would advise to the author to get all this out of the way early and to focus on the relatively independent proposal of including protein abundance and other information (such as perhaps correlated essentiality and degree of conservation) into the judgement of importance or relevance of any particular tree topology for phylogenetics. I would like to see the discussion of several points in more detail.

1. "A cumulative plot of genomic and cellular abundance reveals that at every level genomic abundance underestimates cellular abundance" - so what does this tell us about phylogeny? Also, the datasets that are available to us are full of parasitic microorganisms whose genomes may be experiencing net gene loss, which contributes to the reduction of the "genomic abundance" of almost all categories of genes. Would the picture change if we focus on free-living/saprotrophic organisms?

2. The authors want to rescue the tree by bringing in the functional importance/protein abundance (phenotype), as discussed before. In this case, would not the change of function be equivalent to a HGT, and would this be less or more often than a true genetic HGT?