Section on "Viral hallmark genes: beacons of the ancient virus world", 4th paragraph:maybe tread more carefully on LBA artifacts:if taken literally, and if virus enzymes are long branches, they would attract each other, would they not? (same applies to the argument in the 6th paragraph of the same section).

Section on "Viral hallmark genes: beacons of the ancient virus world", 5th paragraph: do we indeed have the evidence that all viral JRC's are monophyletic, to the exclusion of nucleoplasmin and PNGase? (on the same matter, Table ​Table3:3: 'protein-protein interaction domains of certain enzymes' is ambiguous: the enzymes in question have peptide substrates, so one should perhaps leave open the possibility of theancient relationship to a peptide-modifying enzyme – or disprove it more convincingly).

Table ​Table4:4: consider replacing "smacks of essentialism and might not be fruitful" by something like "does little to explain the trajectories of most other virus-specific and virus hallmark genes".

General discussion item: Archaeal genomes themselves appear to be partitioned into unique (ultimately also eukaryotic) informational genes and bacteria-like operational genes. If this isalso to be understood asevidence for an ancient gene exchange, has there been a concomitant exchange of virus-like elements?

Finally, I would like the authors to address the following. The difference between the proposed scenario and Forterre hypothesis is inthe two main respects: i. Forterre says that ancient cellular life had RNA genome, while the new hypothesis says that RNA genome was replaced by mixed RNA/DNA genome (and perhaps then by DNA genome) pre-escape from inorganic compartments, and ii. Forterre says DNA genome was invented by viruses to protect itself from the host defense, while the new hypothesis says that DNA genome was invented by the primordial pre-escape genetic ensemble in the compartments, perhaps as a physical stabilization measure, and did not favor viral over non-viral genomes, if indeed there was any difference. Is this an accurate summary? If so, perhaps the authors should emphasize not only the difference between theForterre and their own theories, though of coursesuch difference issignificant, but also similar points that set these two theories apart from all the previous ones – i.e., for example, similar views on early and polyphyletic origin of viruses, intertwined evolutionary history of viral and cellular LUCAs, etc.?