1) This manuscript puts forward two different hypotheses. First, the authors hypothesize that increased proximity between cells results in higher external proton concentration due to diffusion limitation and, hence, to an energetic advantage (less molecules respired? oxidized? to create a proton gradient). The second hypothesis founds on the former, assuming that it is a driving force for cell-cell interactions, and states that eukaryotes originated from (randomly interacting) cells that were physically close in biofilms and developed cell bridges via nanotubes. Cells connected by nanotubes would specialize into two kinds, those making mRNA from DNA and those making proteins, losing the other cellular function. Internalization of such interconnected cells would follow, with one cell being engulfed by the other. Ancient nanotubes would become the nuclear pores. While the first hypothesis is interesting and may be an additional explanation for why biofilms form and provides some mechanistic explanation on the evolution of mitochondria, the hypothesis on the origin of eukaryotes is much more speculative (as many others, agreed) and substantially fails to provide selective forces for many of the processes involved (functional specialization of cells and future eukaryotic cell compartments, origin of the nucleus, origin of the endoplasmic reticulum). In addition, the authors seem not to be excessively familiar with microbial ecology and, hence, some ecological assumptions are excessively simplistic or incorrect.

There are many different points that could be commented upon, but I will only concentrate on a few, as being exhaustive would be too long:

2) The idea that cell-cell proximity limits proton diffusion and hence might constitute an energetic advantage due to the creation of steeper proton gradient seems reasonable. As such, it is an interesting additional advantage for the formation of biofilms. However, there is much more to the formation of biofilms than that potential advantage; otherwise, there would not be so many planktonic cells in nature, including those thriving in highly oligotrophic marine waters. Therefore, there must be a trade-off between the advantages of living in a biofilm (including sharing of common goods, protection against external aggression, limited diffusion of molecules, etc.) and the disadvantages of it (competition, cheating, etc.). In other terms, there must still be a driving force stronger than increasing proton concentration locally that justifies intimate inter-species cell-cell interactions. When looking into the real microbial world, this force is most often metabolic complementation. There are myriads of examples.

3) I also find interesting the idea that proton diffusion limitation might have contributed to the morphological evolution undergone by mitochondria, which would have optimized energy production by developing cristae. Hence, the first hypothesis posited by the authors could hold on its own and would perhaps benefit of being published independently. However, the connection of this idea with symbiosis and with the origin of eukaryotes is much weaker; I would perhaps recommend the authors to unlink both.

4) There are several assumptions that are unjustified. One of them is that eukaryotes evolved in the ocean. There is absolutely no evidence indicating whether eukaryotes appeared in marine or freshwater settings. Assuming that eukaryotes appeared in oceans is gratuitous.

The second portion is that we performed our energy benefit calculations assuming sea water as the external medium. Fresh water has a much smaller buffering capacity than sea water, which means that many more of the exported protons would contribute to the concentration gradient, as opposed to being “absorbed” by the buffer. Using fresh water would therefore make the energetic benefit we describe greater. The low Na concentration of fresh water also means that in it perhaps the same benefit would be seen for Na respirers, something not true for sea water. Regardless, the bottom line is that each of the ion portions of the paper would continue to stand for fresh water organisms. We altered the paper by referring the reader to the Reviewer 1 comments for the freshwater case in each of the two sections (Paragraphs 19, 43).

5) In their introduction, the authors dismiss “saltatory internalization” hypotheses of one prokaryotic symbiont within another because this would lead to the collapse of the endosymbiont Na, Ca and K transmembrane gradient. While I agree that saltatory internalization may be unlikely, the arguments given do not seem that clear to me. I understand that maintaining a H + gradient is needed because it is used for energy generation but I do not see why a gradient is needed for the other elements (except for prokaryotes using Na + -driven ATPases). What they need is to keep control of the right Na, Ca and K concentrations within the cell. This justifies the existence of Na, K and Ca transporters and regulatory systems face to the external world. But if a prokaryote enters another prokaryote where the right ionic concentrations are being maintained, it may just take advantage of the homeostasis maintained by the host. I do not see how this can lead to a collapse.

6) The authors say that “even if the transfer were successful for the symbiont, it would likely be fatal to the host [93]. The symbiont would find itself in a nutrient-rich environment, and there would have been no opportunity for mechanisms regulating symbiont division to have evolved. The symbiont would therefore parasitize host energy and carbon and fill the host with progeny, both presumably resulting in host death.” Well, not necessarily, this is another unjustified assumption. First, maybe the endosymbiont parasitizes host energy and carbon, but if there is an appropriate trade-off and it offers some advantage to the host in exchange, a mutualism can be established. Second, organisms in nature do not necessarily behave like Escherichia coli in LB medium at optimal temperature. Many bacteria divide much less frequently and many bacteria dislike copiotrophic (nutrient-rich) environments. Therefore, the fact that the host cytoplasm is nutrient-rich does not necessarily mean that it is the optimal growth medium for an endosymbiont. It might find many inhibitory compounds, including excessive nutrients. It all depends on the specificity (contrary to the randomness proposed by the authors) of the microorganisms involved, notably on their metabolism.

7) The definition of respiration used in the manuscript is ambiguous or inexact. The authors often refer to “proton-respiration” and, sometimes, it seems that the term includes only aerobic respiration. Respiration corresponds to exergonic oxido-reduction reactions involving organic or inorganic molecules with an electron acceptor that can be oxygen or another element or molecule. Strictly speaking, protons are not respired. This introduces some confusion, which is clear in the following point.

8) In their introduction, Hooper & Burnstein go on to criticize hypotheses on the origin of eukaryotes based on syntrophy stating that metabolic symbiosis between specific prokaryotes were at the origin of eukaryotes. These include, notably, the hydrogen hypothesis and the syntrophy hypothesis which, contrary to most other models, attempt to provide a relatively detailed mechanistic pathway for the evolution of eukaryotes, including (right or wrong) selective forces for it. The arguments they provide against these models are mistaken, essentially because they fail to place the occurrence of this kind of symbioses in the appropriate ecological context. First, they say that the respiratory system of the endosymbiont leading to the mitochondrion should be lost under a presumably long period of disuse. They provide part of the answer by saying that the symbiont could have combined respiration and fermentation depending of the available nutrients. But they then dismiss this possibility saying that since the oceans were anoxic (except the surface), aerobic respiration could not be maintained. There are at least three elements that can be raised against this erroneous assumption. First, it might well be that the respiratory chain was maintained for anaerobic respiration? the only thing that needs to change is the affinity of the final cytochrome oxidase in that chain. As a matter of fact, it is still not known whether the ancestor of mitochondria was exclusively aerobic or whether it was a facultative anaerobe. Many mitochondria today can respire anaerobically, using fumarate or nitrate as final electron acceptor. Therefore it could be perfectly possible that the mitochondrial ancestor was only a facultative aerobe. Second, and most importantly, saying that aerobic respiration at the time could not exist because most (but notably not all) of the ocean was anoxic is as displaced and misleading as saying that anaerobic respiration cannot occur today because ocean waters are oxygenated. This is of course wrong; a wide diversity of anaerobic prokaryotes and eukaryotes thrive happily in sediments and soils. It is very important to consider the microbial world at the right and ecologically meaningful scale. And third, let’s imagine that eukaryotes emerged in oceans (the reasoning would also apply to freshwater settings), if the surface ocean was oxygenated and the rest anoxic, this would imply a vast transition zone covering nearly all the planet surface. Now, transition zones between anoxic and oxygenated areas are exactly the places where these two metabolic hypotheses would place the origin of eukaryotes. Transition zones happen in e.g. microbial mats and sediments today and it is notably the place where a wide variety of metabolic symbioses occur, including well-documented bacteria-archaea symbioses, such as methanotrophic archaea with sulfate-reducing bacteria or fermentative bacteria with methanogenic archaea. Transition zones would then be an ideal place for versatile and facultative metabolisms to take place. In an origin-of-eukaryotes context, aerobic respiration could be used whenever oxygen levels rose or upon movement of the consortia towards the upper part of the gradient; fermentation and/or anaerobic respiration would take place lower in the anoxic part of that gradient. Models on the origin of eukaryotes must consider microbial ecology and the right environmental context into account.

9) Hooper & Burnstein propose a hypothesis on the origin of eukaryotes which, they say, provides a general driving force of the first step of eukaryogenesis. However, as mentioned above, the “driving force” that they propose (stronger H + gradients across membranes leading to close physical association between cells) is just one potential advantage of physical proximity, which needs to overcome forces acting on the opposite direction (e.g. competition and cheating). This could perhaps provide a potential additional mechanistic explanation to some trends in eukaryotic evolution (e.g. mitochondrial morphology), but it does not provide any real driving force for the origin of eukaryotes per se; neither for the specific interaction between different prokaryotes nor for the origin of the nucleus or the endoplasmic reticulum.

10) The authors criticize saltatory mechanisms but in a sense they propose a saltatory mechanism since the association between the two prokaryotes that led to the origin of eukaryotes occurred by chance and then was stabilized by nanotubes. As the authors say, it is not known whether such nanotubules can form between archaea and bacteria, partly because their membranes are so different. It is also not known whether this can happen between different bacteria. The available knowledge would tend to suggest that this kind of interactions is highly specific.

11) Coming back to selective forces, it is unclear what that would be for cell specialization once cells are connected through nanotubes in the pathway that they propose. It is extremely difficult to imagine that one cell loses its protein synthesis machinery and the other its DNA/RNA replication/transcription system being connected just by nanotubes. First, why? which driving force is acting here for such specialization to occur? Second, transport in both directions must have surely not been efficient due to the small diameter of the nanotubes and to the fact that only a fraction of the cellular surface would be connected prior to engulfment. It is extremely difficult to envisage the functioning of such assemblage without true integration because the diffusion/transport of essential molecules would be extremely poor. If H + diffusion limitation is seen as an important factor for the author’s model, protein and nucleic acid transportation through tiny tubes should be seen as a much stronger and deleterious factor.

12) It is unclear that cells give ATP for free and hence that ATP/ADP were exchanged between the two symbionts leading to the origin of eukaryotes. What would be the reason leading to one of the cells to renounce to its energetics and to the other to deliver ATP to its neighbor?

13) Losing the cell wall is not a problem; there are several examples of this among bacteria and archaea. However, there is a problem with membranes and there seems to be some confusion when the authors talk about bacterial and archaeal membranes. For instance, it is said that “in Ignicoccus hospitalis respiration occurs on the outer membrane [221], not the inner as in other prokaryotes” (p.19). Ignicoccus is an archaeon and archaea have in general one single membrane. The second membrane in Ignicoccus appeared independently and cannot be compared with that of Gram negative bacteria (the second membrane is analogous, not homologous) or with other archaea lacking such membrane. Also, the authors seem to privilege the endosymbiotic origin of the nucleus, particularly of one archaeon within another archaeon (p17), but later they recognize that the eukaryotic membranes are bacterial in nature and also that the cytoplasm is more bacterial-like. How do they explain this apparent contradiction? And if there was a change of membranes, why and how?

14) A pathway for the progressive engulfment of a cell within another is proposed. The nanotubules would become the nuclear pores. That some elements of the nuclear pores might have evolved from the machinery to form nanopores may be a relevant hypothesis potentially testable by comparative genomics and phylogenomics. However, this does not imply necessarily that internalization happened afterwards.

15) The endoplasmic reticulum would have then evolved from the “scar” left by the engulfing process. But if this was just a remnant of that engulfment, why didn’t it disappear? Why it developed further? What for? Which selective force?

16) The origin of mitochondria remains unexplained. Why did mitochondria evolved as true endosymbionts and not as interconnected cells with a host? This points out to the lack of explanatory forces underlying the proto-nucleus and proto-cytoplasm intercellular connection and subsequent internalization. The fact that mitochondria were incorporated as energy-producing organelles points to the power of true endosymbioses. It also illustrates the importance of metabolism-based symbiotic interactions.

Quality of written English: Acceptable