This manuscript presents the analysis of the nearly complete genomes of two archaea potentially involved in a co-specific symbiotic relationship related, respectively, to Nanoarchaeum and to the Sulfolobales (Crenarchaeota). The genomes of the two organisms were assembled from 5 different single-amplified genomes (SAGs) from fluorescently labeled cell-sorted cells (using fluorescently labeled antibodies against Nanoarchaeum equitans). Based on the observed number of expected genes, the genomes are estimated to be >90% complete. This work is important because it provides a second example of a highly reduced nanoarchaeal genome (although less than the so far only available sequence of N. equitans). Comparative genomic analysis provides an interesting insight on the evolutionary process of genome reduction accompanying obligatory symbioses. It also provides information about the metabolic pathways present in each of the two symbiotic partners, although it is not possible to make firm conclusions about missing functions when the genomes are not fully sequenced, especially when the number of genes involved in such functions is small and/or those genes organize in operons.

Despite the interest of this genomic analysis, I have a major concern with the phylogenetic analyses shown and their interpretation. The authors present two alternative hypotheses for the placement of Nanoarchaeota and say that their new phylogenetic analyses including the new Nst1 sequences allow distinguishing between the two. The first hypothesis places the Nanoarchaeota in a basal position in the archaeal tree; the lineage would have then retained ancestral features. The second hypothesis places the Nanoarchaeota within the Euryarchaeota, being likely related to the Thermococcales; in this case, relatively recent, rapid evolution linked to the parasitic lifestyle would have led to genome collapse (1st paragraph, page 14 in the ms). However, first, I have the impression that, from the beginning, the authors are not neutral and favor an a priori basal Nanoarchaeum position, as they state in page 5 prior to the description of their phylogenetic results: “Because Nanoarchaeota form a deep archaeal branch…”. And second, such a basal position cannot be deduced from their analyses to the exclusion of a euryarchaeotal affiliation because:

1) Most phylogenetic trees presented in the manuscript show a monophyletic grouping of the Nanoarchaeota and the Euryarchaeota. This is the case in the maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree of concatenated ribosomal proteins in Figure 3, where the two nanoarchaeota form a monophyletic group with the Euryarchaeota with 100% bootstrap value. This relationship can be even seen in the phylogenetic analysis based on SSU rRNA genes only (Figure 1), where several nanoarchaeota sequences form a monophyletic group (98% bootstrap for both ML and neighbor joining analyses) with the only euryarchaeotal sequence (Pyrococcus furiosus) included in the tree. I would be curious to see what happens when a more balanced and representative taxon sampling, including more euryarchaeotal SSU rRNA sequences is included in the analysis.

2) The monophyly of Nanoarchaeota and Euryarchaeota is retrieved in most of the trees presented even if the phylogenetic analyses may be affected by a long-branch attraction artifact due to i) the acceleration of the evolutionary rate experienced by the genes of the symbiotic/parasitic nanoarchaeota and ii) the extreme low GC content bias (24% GC). Since the authors demonstrate that a genome reduction process accompanied by gene splitting and an increasing low GC content (typical of symbiont/parasite fast-evolving genomes) is ongoing in these nanoarchaeota, the reasonable null hypothesis in this case would be that these archaea are displaced towards the base of the archaeal tree by a long-branch attraction artifact (LBA). To truly discriminate between the two hypotheses, analyses tending to eliminate potential LBA, such as the use of sequence evolution models that accommodate better differences in evolutionary rates (e.g. CAT), the progressive elimination of fast-evolving sites from their analyses or amino acid recoding would be needed.

3) The gene content of the nanoarchaeotal genomes would reinforce a euryarchaeotal position, as the authors suggest at a given point. In this sense, it would be interesting to show a parsimony gene loss/gain analysis not (or not only) from the last universal archaeal ancestor but most of all from the last common euryarchaeotal ancestor.

Given the nanoarchaeal-euryarchaeal monophyletic signal already observed in many of the phylogenetic trees shown and the euryarchaeota-like gene content of their genomes, the most parsimonious hypothesis would be that the Nanoarchaeota are reduced, fast evolving euryarchaeota. Whether they are specifically related to the Thermococcales or to any of the several non-methanogenic euryarchaeotal lineages for which genome sequences are not available remain unresolved.

Other comments/questions:

Can the authors rule out the possibility of (partial) chimeric assembly during the amplification, SAG and metagenomic sequencing and assembly process? This might be particularly important when considering the potential acquisition of genes by horizontal gene transfer, especially when close homologs are not present in Nanoarchaeum equitans.

Specify whether ambiguously aligned positions were removed and provide the number of non-ambiguously aligned positions used for each tree in the figure legends and/or methods.

Please, check the use of capital letters and italics for Latin nomenclature only (not for vernacular names such as “nanoarchaeon”). Use italics only for genera and species names in phylogenetic trees.