This is an interesting and synthetic review on the molecular mechanisms and effectors responsible for cell invasive growth in animals and plants, where most data are available. The review highlights the similarities and homologies existing between both so that, at the end, the question of whether such mechanisms existed already in the last common eukaryotic ancestor (LECA) can be asked.

I have few comments on the review part, which is very well documented and naturally oriented to the final question asked in the manuscript. Perhaps, it would have been important to mention data existing for other eukaryotic phyla whenever available. Animals and plants are divergent in the eukaryotic tree, but the possibility that they have shared a most recent common ancestor (for instance, to the exclusion of excavates) cannot be completely ruled out.

At any rate, the question of whether invasive cell growth mechanisms and effectors existed already in LECA is posed in a very cautious and reasoned (even shy) manner. The authors highlight the fact that even if individual proteins are homologous in animals and plants and, therefore, potentially ancestral, the processes themselves may have resulted from the combination of different effectors in the two eukaryotic lineages. Although not clearly stated, the authors seem to suggest by this that the processes for invasive growth were present in LECA but that different combinations of effectors occurred in different eukaryotic lineages. This would imply a last common ancestry for both, effectors and processes. However, it might also be that from a same pool of ancestral proteins, the same or different proteins were recruited independently for a similar function, invasive growth, in later eukaryotic evolution, i.e. evolved by convergence from a common pool of proteins. The two possibilities should be perhaps more clearly distinguished.

Finally, the authors did not evoke the logical next question: do these proteinsn involved in invasive growth have homologs in prokaryotes? Do they play a role in analogous processes (e.g. cell polarization and gliding in social bacteria)? Describing those processes in bacteria is likely out the scope of this manuscript, but a comment on these might underscore the evolutionary orientation of this review.

Please, do not use “kingdom” to refer to plants, animals and fungi. The 5-kingdom classification by Witthaker has no phylogenetic support.