Peralta and co-workers present a comparative analysis of 1416 orthologous proteins shared by five species of Rhizobiales, three plant symbionts, one plant pathogen and one animal pathogen. After carrying out phylogenetic analyses of those orthologs and finding three major topologies, Peralta et al. study the sequence variability of a subset of these proteins by looking at the number of synonymous (dS) and non-synonymous (dN) substitutions and a related measurement, the "species signature" defined as the number of species-specific amino acid residues. The authors study possible correlations between protein sequence variability and a series of associated properties (polarity, electrostatic charge, secondary structure, molecular volume and amino acid composition) and find particular trends, which suggest that particular physico-chemical properties are associated with particular functional roles. The authors further speculate that much sequence variation is not related to phylogeny but to adaptation to particular niches. Although the last conclusion needs further testing, the overall work is properly done and interesting and I have only some relatively minor comments.

My first comment relates to the "species signature". The authors find "striking" to see a "correlation of this parameter with codon evolution, mainly nonsynonymous substitution rate (dN), indicating that the species signature is efficient to obtain important evolutive information, directly from the protein sequence". This is not striking at all since, even if dN is estimated from DNA sequence, it corresponds in fine to changes in amino acid sequence, so that the "species signature" is but a subset of the amino acid changes resulting from non-synonymous substitutions (dN). It is normal that they both contain evolutionary information because the two measures are correlated. What I do not understand well is the advantage of the "species signature" versus dN. The number of non-synonymous substitutions is independent of taxonomic sampling, but the "species signature" depends on taxonomic sampling. By contrast to dN, as more and more strains or species genome sequences become available within a genus, the "species signature" will most likely progressively decrease and eventually reach zero (especially if one considers orthologs for a same protein from the whole tree of life). In this sense, the use of the "species signature" seems limited and restricted to particular case studies.

The authors show that changes in orthologs correlate with particular physico-chemical properties of the corresponding proteins and, hence, likely functional adaptation to particular niches. However, this correlation remains at a theoretical, predictive level. Since the studied proteins are annotated and their functions known, it would be very illustrative if the authors could point at one or several particular examples and explain them in the context of their analysis.

