This manuscript is a reply to the commentary by Alcock et al. (2010, Science 327:649·650) to a previous opinion article by J. Gross and Bhattacharya (2009, Nature Reviews Genetics 10:495·505), where these authors already exposed the hypothesis that mitochondrial and plastid evolution was driven by the host, which imposed the protein-sorting machinery in a step-wise process starting from the outer membrane towards the interior of the organelle (the "outsider's" view).

Alcock et al. presented an opposed view (the "insider's" view), implying that mitochondrial and plastid protein translocation machineries would have been mostly derived from existing endosymbiont bacterial transporters. This manuscript is just a prolongation of that discussion, though it has the merit of raising the divergences between the two views in a direct way and highlighting some key unsolved issues. I have two general comments.

The major problem to test those models lies in the difficulties to trace the origin of the genes encoding the different components of the organelles' protein translocation systems. Gross and Bhattacharya are right in pointing out the problem of establishing a clear homology between some Tim and Tic components and the LivH family of bacterial amino acid transporters, since trans-membrane domains are often affected by convergence. However, I do not see why "In the absence of clear support for a prokaryotic origin, the most likely explanation is that Tim 17/23 and Tim22 were derived from the host of the mitochondrial forerunner...". For that, homology with host genes that predated the mitochondrial/plastid symbiosis should be established. This might be done in principle for plastid evolution, but not for mitochondria (unless primary amitochondriate eukaryotes are found some day). Actually, it could very well be that bacterial genes encoding membrane transporters and carriers were transferred by EGT to the host nucleus and evolved rapidly while a backup copy was still retained in the organelle. The nuclear-encoded proteins might have retained their specificity to interact with the former bacterial membrane while acquiring novel properties selected by the new needs of the consortium. In a way, the outside-to-inside view, which appears logical when thinking in terms of gene and genome evolution (it is indeed unlikely that gene tinkering occurred in the endosymbiont's genome) and host-endosymbiont interaction, might have been subsequent (or consequent) to an inside-to-outside process of EGT. Of course, this is hypothetical, and protein translocation machineries might have evolved from completely new genes (though, in the case of mitochondria, to what extent the evolution of new genes was not impacted directly or indirectly by the endosymbiosis?), but it is not possible to exclude that hypothesis with the data at hand.

My second comments relates to the propensity in the manuscript to separate host and endosymbiont's "interests" in an advanced state of symbiogenesis. For instance, for Gross and Bhattacharya "we come to the key question implied by the insiders' view that remains to be answered: what were the selective advantages conferred to the endosymbiont that led it to relinquish autonomy by importing host proteins to manipulate its biochemistry?". The question is not well formulated because as soon as an obligatory symbiosis establishes, which implies EGT of one or several essential genes to the host with the subsequent loss in the endosymbiont, selection begins to act at the consortium level. Likely, it was much more efficient in terms of the consortium energetic to reduce the bacterial genome to near extinction (or complete extinction, e.g. most mitochondria-derived hydrogenosomes). The question could only be asked for facultative symbionts, but facultative symbionts do keep, by essence, their autonomy; otherwise, they could not make a living on their own.