This work is a reanalysis of several conserved paralogous genes used by Lake et al. to place the root of the tree of life based on indel sharing that were in apparent disagreement with a rooting proposed by Cavalier-Smith between the Chloroflexi (Eobacteria) and the rest of bacterial + archaeal groups. A key factor to attempt such analyses is the quality of the alignment. Structural alignment data shows that the analysis those paralogous genes based on indels yields results that would be compatible with the rooting proposed by Cavalier-Smith.

This work is interesting as it shows some of the drawbacks that can be linked to this kind of indel analysis, particularly in what concerns ambiguous alignment and convergence. Yet, rooting the tree of life is a difficult task and there is possibly too little information left in ancient duplicated genes that allows answering that question with meaningful statistical support. From the four sets of genes studied here on a structural basis, two of them are discarded as unable to provide polarizing indel information: S12/RpoC because they may not be homologous, and Hsp70/MreB, which are inconclusive. The alignment of EF-G/EF-Tu proteins is ambiguous at the indel region used for polarization of character states, although quaternary structure-based alignment was not possible. Only two couples of paralogs yield what might be useful information according to Valas and Bourne, the HisA/HisF and PyrD/HemE.

Though of interest, one can wonder whether this information is enough to confidently exclude the root of the tree of life from everything outside the Chloroflexi. In addition of the alignment quality, there are other factors that can be of crucial importance here. One is convergence, as rightly pointed out by the authors, and the other is horizontal gene transfer (HGT). HGT is but very briefly mentioned here to exclude the possibility that PyrD has been transferred between archaea and bacteria recently. However, other protein genes, notably gyrase and Hsp70 genes are very likely cases of HGT from bacteria to archaea. Despite so, they are included in this kind of indel work. Careful phylogenetic analyses should be done for all the genes that are included in these attempts so that only vertically inherited genes are used. The possibility of important HGT levels between Firmicutes and/or Actinobacteria and archaea is not discarded. Finally, other problems such as hidden paralogies or even selective paralog loss cannot be excluded.

Another comment is that the fact that these results are compatible with a rooting between Chloroflexi/Eobacteria and anything else does not necessarily imply that the root is actually close to these organisms. First, more than 50% of the bacterial phylum-level groups correspond to candidate divisions without cultivated members. A similar trend occurs in archaea. Therefore, there is a considerable ignorance about the indel distribution in at least half of the bacterial diversity. Also, though the most parsimonious scenarios appear more likely to us, this is not proof that evolution proceeds that way. A cautionary vision should be held in this regard.