In this paper, Dibrova et al. present a web based tool, which enables detection of remote homology between protein families. The tool and underlying process for its development are well described; it can be used by anyone who interested in relationships between protein families. The web server has a user friendly interface: a search is initiated simply by typing the COG identifier and the tool returns related COGs ranked by the HHMer score. Another strength of this tool is its speed – results are generated very quickly, so this allows the user to test and analyze a large number of cases. The authors used the tool to identify remote relatives of ATP synthases and convincingly demonstrated (supporting their conclusions using other methods) similarity between the flagellar ATPases and subunits of F O F 1 -ATP synthases. Authors also demonstrated how their tool can be used for analysis of gene fusion events. I do not have any major concerns about the tool or its description. Minor concerns: 1. The tools has certain limitations, although they are inherent to COG entries themselves. For example, COG X might depict the entire multi-domain protein, whereas COGs Y and Z will depict individual domains that are also present in the multi-domain protein depicted by COG X. In this case, COGalyser 1 will show distribution of domain families that are certainly related, but not in any particularly meaningful biological order (HMMer score ranking is the only measure). For example, running COG 0643 (Chemotaxis protein histidine kinase CheA) results in the following hits: 1) COG 2198 (HPT (histidine-containing phosphotransfer domain), which is the N-terminal domain of CheA, but is also present as a stand-alone protein in various signaling systems; 2) COG 0745 (DNA-binding response regulator, OmpR family, contains REC and winged-helix (wHTH) domain) – I can only guess that this COG was picked due to the fact that some, but not all CheA proteins contain the REC domain; otherwise there is no relationship between CheA and OmpR type of proteins; 3) COG 0784 (CheY chemotaxis protein) – the same story here, CheY is a version of REC, so it is homologous to a domain, which sometimes (but certainly not always) is present in CheA (our original search query); 4) COG2205 (K + sensing histidine kinase KdpD) – which is a multi-domain protein, which contains the HATPase_c domain, and so does CheA. So, what we see here is not really a meaningful evolutionary relationship (e.g. homology), but rather relationships between proteins and their parts – individually and jointly. Perhaps it should be pointed out in the paper somewhere that relationships between COGs might be complicated, at least in the case of multi-domain proteins.

It would be useful to indicate what criteria were used to select representative genomes for HMM construction (I presume – phylogenetic relationships, to represent as much diversity as possible without a bias toward “more frequently sequenced” phyla?)

I think the name of the tool is awkward. This abbreviation eliminates just 2 letters from a full name - COG analyzer, but this makes it sound… well, awkward. I suggest to go with the full name or to come up with a better abbreviation. I recall the original COG searching tool was called COGnitor. If it is no longer in use, perhaps the authors (Tatusov & Koonin) may allow you to use it!