The current study is related to the previous work by the authors reporting a novel domain superfamily within the β-grasp fold (Biology Direct 2007, 2:4). In this investigation, authors launched a large-scale exploration of the β-grasp fold diversity and evolution. This is an important, but daunting task, because the fold is well populated and comprises divergent domain families. In my opinion, both strengths and weaknesses of the paper are resulting from this fact.

Strengths
The main strength of this paper is systematic and logical classification of the fold, defining its core elements and linking numerous elaborations to functional diversity. This is well done by using an array of computational techniques interrogating both sequence and structure. Natural classification of protein folds and domains is urgently needed, thus this work makes a significant contribution to the field. An important element of this study is uncovering several novel domain groups. For example, I was intrigued by the finding that flagellar hook-filament junction proteins FlgL and FlgK are related to the flagellar cap protein FliD comprising a new version of the 5-stranded β-GF clade, Spatial distribution and function of these proteins in the flagellar assembly are quite similar; however, their relatedness in sequence or structure has never been demonstrated before. I am certain that other facts unearthed in this work may draw attention of other specialists studying various systems involving β-GF proteins.

Weakness
In my opinion, the weakness of this manuscript is in its organization. Potentially, this can be improved, although I keep the door open for a counterargument by not providing constructive suggestions on how to do that. Because there is such a large body of information, its organization is important. As for any scientific contribution, it is imperative to identify what is the status quo in the field and what has been done by the investigators to advance our knowledge. This particular paper is written as mix of a thorough literature review (there are 162 references!) and an original study. The purpose of the former is (hopefully) to synthesize novel ideas/leads from numerous known facts, whereas the purpose of the latter is to generate novel facts filling the gaps in knowledge. This paper does both, but it is does not effectively separates the two. If one wants to know exactly which facts are newly discovered (and there are many of them!), it will take some time... Ideally, all information pertinent to the known facts should be introduced in the Introduction and Discussion, whereas Results should show clearly what new information has been obtained in this study. I think combining Results and Discussion in one section creates this feeling that known and novel facts are mashed together. I know that it is much easier for authors to present such a complex study in this way, but the trade-off is the lack of above mentioned distinction. One suggestion on improving the overall organization of the current scheme is to introduce numerical headings and subheadings. For example, in the current version of the manuscript the reader is left to wonder whether "Basal versions of the β-GF" is a subheading of "Natural classification of domains" or they are equal headings, and so on. Having 1., 1.1, 1.1.1. system should help to see the logic of the story better.

Neutral feeling
Essentially half of the manuscript is devoted to developing a scenario for the fold evolution. This scenario is certainly plausible, as there are no obvious flaws or contradictions. One the other hand, the starting point of inferring relationships is structural information and so is the end point of their verification. I might be wrong here, but this is the feeling. I wish we would have an independent method (or better methods) of testing these relationships more rigorously.

Specific comments
2. On page 6 there is a reference to HMM searches initiated with models built from multiple alignments; however, there is no mentioning of the HMMER package in the Materials and Methods.
