It is often claimed that Archaea use bacterial-like proteins to regulate an eukaryotic-like transcription machinery. At the cross-road between regulators and basal transcription factors, the protein MBF1, present in Archaea and Eukarya, but not in Bacteria, is an interesting model for mechanistic and evolutionary studies. In their paper, Bettina Siebers and co-workers have first used literature data and in silico analyses to compare the archaeal and eukaryal MBF1. In addition, they have used a MBF1 mutant from the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae to check various constructions of chimeric archaeal/eukaryal MBF1 proteins. In Eukarya, MBF1 proteins interact with TBP and regulatory proteins of the FTZ-F1 family. Whereas TBP is conserved between Archaea and Eukarya, FTZ-F1 regulators have no homologues in Archaea.

The experimental work by Siebers and co-workers shows that the archaeal MBF1 cannot complement the eukaryotic one. Chimeric proteins only work when the C-terminal domain of the eukaryal one is replaced by the archaeal one, but this domain is precisely the domain of MBF1 which is dispensable for in vivo function.

Since the central domain of MBF1 that probably interacts with TBP is conserved between Archaea and Eukarya, the lack of complementation probably came from the differences between the N-terminal domains of the Archaeal and Eukaryal MBF1 and discrete differences in the central domain. The determinants for interaction between MBF1 and FTZ-F1 are probably missing in the archaeal protein. The archaeal proteins apparently exhibit specific features that allow them to interact directly with DNA and RNA polymerase without the requirement for an additional FTZ-F1-like protein. In particular, a Zn ribbon motif present in the N-terminal part of the archaeal protein and a set of basic residues conserved in the archaeal protein could be essential for the interaction of the archaeal protein with TBP, RNA polymerase and DNA.

I think that publication of such paper in Biology Direct should be the opportunity for the authors to discuss more about the evolutionary and/or physiological aspects of their work. It seems that MBF1 in Archaea can be considered as a kind of additional basal transcription factor (dispensable since lacking in some Thaumarchaeota). What can be its role (using information from the genomic context)? How the system evolved from Archaea to eukarya or vice versa?

It would be nice if the authors could compare two scenarios, either the loss of FTZ-F1-like proteins in the archaeal lineage or their gain in the eukaryal lineage. They could possibly even suggest experiments to evolve the archaeal MBF1 protein into an archaeal-like one or vice versa.
A MBF1 protein is present in the recently available genome of the thaumarchaeon Nitrososphaera gargensis. Considering the possible position of Thaumarchaeota at the base of the archaeal tree, it should be interesting to add this protein in the phylogenetic analysis.