Georgiades and co-workers report a phylogenomic analysis of the order Rickettsiales, in order to identify the mechanisms of reductive evolution that shape the history of this order. Rickettsiales are members of the phylum proteobacteria, subdivision alpha. They are intracellular parasites of eukaryotic cells and « closely » related to the ancestor of mitochondria. Rickettsiales are therefore interesting both from a medical and an evolutionary expertise. Several genomes of Rickettsia have been now sequenced and already submitted to extensive comparative genomic analyses because of their medical and evolutionary interest. The analysis of Georgiades and co-workers update previous analyses by including 11 genomes of Rickettsiales and a Caulobacter as outgroup. They have obtained from their phylogenomic analysis a more precise estimation of the gene content of the last common ancestors of Rickettsia, Rickettsiales and Rickettsiae Their result confirm that, as expected, intracellular Rickettsia have mainly evolved by gene loss.

The authors have focused on the distinction between gene loss and horizontal gene transfer, by analyzing individual phylogenies of genes absent in one species. They identify several cases of HGT and propose the direction of the transfer and potential sources for the donor (in the case of transfer to Rickettsiae) or the recipient (in the case of transfer from Rickettsiae). The number of transfer detected is very limited 12, versus more than 2000 gene losses), but raises interesting biological questions. In the case of transfer to Rickettsiae, the authors suggest that it involved either eukaryotes infected by a Rickettsia (possibly a protist) or another parasite (a virus or a bacterium) infecting the Rickettsia infected cell. They do not really discuss the case of transfer from Rickettsiae. They are very rare but quite interesting since they suggest that descendants of the parasitic bacterium that received the rickettsial gene within the infected eukaryotic cell were later on able to transfer this gene to free living bacterium. This confirms that intracellular pathogens are not completely close systems but can participate to the network of gene transfer in nature. For example, this suggests that a eukaryotic gene (or the gene of a eukaryotic virus) could be transferred to free living bacteria by the intermediate of an intracellular pathogenic bacteria.
In their analysis, the authors compare the individual gene trees obtained to the 16 S rRNA tree to distinction between gene loss and horizontal gene transfer. It is unclear if this is the best strategy, since 16 S rRNA should be quite similar between Rickettsiae, with possibly a lack of resolution of the tree. They mention the whole core gene concatenated tree. Is this tree congruent with the 16 S rRNA tree? The authors could have updated this tree and use it as the reference species tree in their analysis. In any case, it should be interesting to have on the same figure the whole genome tree compared to the species tree (preferentially based on core gene phylogeny) (Figure 1).

The authors also identify a low number of new genes without homologues in data base (ORFans) in Rickettsia. They indicate that the origin and function of such genes remain a mystery. In fact, it has been recently shown that many ORFans in Archaeal and bacterial genomes have a viral or plasmidic origin (Cortez et al., 2009). These genes are usually short, AT-rich, and located in genome region with traces of active or ancient integrated extra chromosomal elements. What about the genes detected here? Is it possible to imagine a viral origin? What is known about plasmid and or viruses in Rickettsiae? Cortez et al., have described several putative provirus's (proplasmids) in several Rickettsiae (Additional data file 3 in Cortez et al ., 2009). It could be interesting to use their analysis to see if some ORFans genes or genes involved in loss and HGT described here belong to these putative integrated elements.

(Cortez D, Forterre P, Gribaldo S: A hidden reservoir of integrative elements is the major source of recently acquired foreign genes and ORFans in Archaeal and bacterial genomes. Genome Biol. 2009 10(6):R65).

