The origin of viral genes is presently a hot topic of discussion. Some authors consider that all viral genes originated from cellular genes robbed by viruses whereas others emphasize that new genes can also appear in viral lineages and be transferred later on from viruses to cells. Phylogenies combining viral and cellular genes are indeed often difficult to interpret, especially the direction of transfer, and the interpretation can be strongly dependent of the prejudice of the author. This paper is an example of such case. Eugene Koonin has recognized in a previous paper the existence of specific viral genes (hallmark genes) that, according to him, even originated before cells, in a primordial hydrothermal vent [29]. However, he is also a proponent of the idea that eukaryotes and their viruses originated after the emergence of Archaea and Bacteria from this primordial vent [29]. In this scenario, eukaryotes originated by the association of an ancient bacterium and an ancient archaeon, and eukaryotic viruses originated by combining genes of bacterial and archaeal viruses together with eukaryotic genes from their hosts. In this scenario, genes present in eukaryotic viruses could not have originated directly from the ancestral viral world, but should have originated either from prokaryotic viruses or from the virus hosts. As a consequence, the authors systematically favour in this paper transfers from cells to viruses to explain the origin of NCLDV ligases.

I have a different prejudice. I think that most core genes of NCLDV are viral hallmark genes that originated directly in ancient viral lineages. Furthermore, I suspect that NCLDV proteins involved in replication might have played an important role in the origin of modern eukaryotic DNA genomes [35]. I thus favour the possibility of ancient LGT from NCLDV to eukaryotes. The phylogenies presented in this paper do not really allow to decide between these different interpretations but raises interesting questions.

An important point, in my opinion, is to determine, if possible, which ligase (s) was (were) present in the last common ancestor of each of the three domains. This is missing in the manuscript. To my understanding, the ancestral bacterium should have contained an NAD-dependent DNA ligase. It should thus be important to present a more exhaustive tree of bacterial NAD ligase in Figure ​Figure1,1, with their distribution among the various bacterial divisions, to clarify this point. For me, the tree in Figure ​Figure11 suggests that several subfamilies of NAD ligases were already established before one of them was recruited in the bacterial domain. This tree suggests also the existence of several subfamilies presently encoded by bacterioviruses and distantly related to the NCLDV DNA ligases. For me, it fits very well with the idea that the bacterial DNA ligase has a viral origin, and that Bacteria on one side, Archaea/Eukarya on the other, recruited independently their DNA replication machinery from different viruses.

In the case of ATP-dependent ligases, it should be important to determine which ligases were present in the LECA (the Last Eukaryotic Common Ancestor), in the ancestor of Archaea, and possibly in the common ancestor of Archaea and Eukarya. The trees suggest for me that ATP-dependent ligases were in fact recruited several times independently in the three domains. It should be also important to indicate on the tree where are the hosts of respective viruses. This can sometimes helps to polarize the direction of transfer. For instance, if the host is not located at its expected position in the cellular tree, one can suspect a transfer from the virus to the host.

In these phylogenies, when the authors detect a DNA ligase gene in Bacteria or Archaea, it would be important to determine if this is the bona fide ligase of the domain, or a ligase present in the genome of an integrated virus and/or plasmid [36]. In other words, it is important to distinguish in cellular genomes those genes that are really cellular (they were already present in the ancestor of a particular domain or recruited from another cell by LGT) and those that are in fact viral (present in integrated viruses or related elements). The confusion between these two kinds of genes in phylogenies can explain, in my opinion, the present confusion between networks and trees.

Finally, it should be interesting to have an idea of the structural differences between the various ligase subfamilies studied here. In my opinion, cellular ligases (originating from the ancestor of a particular domain) should be very similar in terms of structure, as it is the case for instance for DNA gyrase in all Bacteria or Topo II in all Eukarya, or else for Topo IB in both Archaea and Eukarya [37,38]. In contrast, families that diverged from ancient viral lineages before LUCA should exhibit more structural differences (as it is the case between DNA gyrase, T4 and eukaryotic Topo II or else between archaeal/eukayal Topo IB and bacterial or Poxvirus Topo IB) [37,38].

I thus encourage the authors to consider the two alternative possibilities in the discussion of their results, either LGT from cells to viruses or from viruses to cells.

