The origin of life remains a major unsolved problem in science, and no consensus exists in the community of people who try to tackle this problem, despite the great number of theories that have already been proposed. In an accompanying paper, Mulkidjanian proposed a new theory in which the first organisms were photosynthetizers, that used zinc sulfide (ZnS) formed in sub-aerial setting to capture solar energy for abiotic reduction of CO2. In this paper, Mulkidjanian and Galperin look in modern cells for support of this theory. By extensively reviewing the literature, they made six observations that could be viewed as supporting the idea that Zinc has indeed played a major role in early life evolution. In particular, they conclude from their survey of the experimental literature that ribozymes can work using Zinc as cofactor instead of magnesium, and that zinc is enriched in proteins with "old folds" or "old functions". This part of the paper is very interesting and can push the biochemists to look more carefully at the real metal dependency of the protein they are studying. These observations convince me that somehow Zinc should have played an important role in early biological evolution. An interesting observation is that the fraction of Zn-containing enzymes is higher in Eukarya than in Bacteria or Archaea. If the hypothesis of the author is correct, this supports heretical ideas according to which the proto-eukaryotic lineage might be more ancient than streamlined lineages of Archaea and Bacteria [333]. The authors call the ancestor of Archaea and Eukarya, a proto-archaeon or a pro-eukaryotic archaeon. This is based on the idea that evolution always goes from simple to complex and that streamlining in the archaeal domain has been much less important than complexification in the eukaryotic domain, something not so clear at the molecular level. Considering that Archaea are probably monophyletic [288], I think that the authors should avoid these confusing terms (proto-archaeon or a pro-eukaryotic archaeon) and only refer to the pro-eukaryotic ancestor.
More importantly considering the objective of this paper, I have a fundamental problem with the idea of an early Zinc world. Indeed, from my own lab experience, it is clear that Zinc has the ability to strongly induce cleavage of DNA, especially at high temperature [334]. Zinc has even a stronger deleterious effect on RNA. The cleavage of polyribonucleotide by Zinc has been extensively studies by Butzow and Eichhorn in the last century. These authors have shown in particular that RNA is especially prone to Zinc-induced degradation and even argued that the higher resistance of DNA to metal-induce degradation explains why DNA replaced RNA as cellular genetic material in the course of evolution [335]. The high sensitivity of RNA to Zinc should have created a great problem for early RNA-based systems (before the invention of proteins that could protect RNA against Zinc-induced hydrolysis). In any case, if the Zinc world really occurred it should have done so at low temperature. The Zinc world hypothesis therefore strongly supports the idea of a cold origin of life. It raises the possibility that life could have only invades high temperature environment after the emergence of DNA and modern complex proteins. In any case, this paper is important because it should stimulate investigators to resume the study the effect of Zinc on RNA stability in the presence of minerals, lipids and/or peptides, and to analyze the activity of various ribozymes in the presence of this metal at different temperatures.
Although I found this paper really interesting, I think that the authors were misguided in connecting their Zinc world hypothesis to the Martin and co-workers hydrothermal vent scenario for the origin of life, in which, as described by Mulkidjanian and Galperin: "Bacteria and Archaea are descendents of two distinct populations that thrive around hydrothermal vents". The plural of vents in that description is misleading. Indeed, in that scenario, life should have originated and evolved up to modern cells in a single chimney, since life forms were trapped in mineral cages until the advent of Bacteria and Archaea. If the conditions were favourable to the development of a Zinc-world in cold hydrothermal settings, many independent primitive Zinc worlds should have emerged more or less simultaneously at many places at the earth surface. In the one chimney scenario, this means that all hydrothermal vents at the earth surface should have produce living organisms, but that Archaea and Bacteria originated from the same chimney (out of millions) and wiped out all other cells that were produced by other chimneys!! This seems ridiculous. Even if all ancestral chimneys were connected into a single giant chimney all around the globe, living organisms could not have moved and competed from one part of this giant chimney to another since they were trapped in mineralized cages (ZnS compartments), so LUCA and its descendents should have originated from the same region of this giant chimney, against wiping out cells that were produced by other parts of this chimney. In general, I don't think that one can trace the origin of the three domains to the evolution of the vent systems and I don't buy the geochemical scenario proposed by the authors for the origin of the three cellular domains. To explain the formation of the three domains, one should understand why three types of molecular biology (for instance three versions of the ribosomes) originated from LUCA, and this cannot be related simply to considerations based on various metabolisms.
Generally speaking I think that the authors, as many other scientists working in the origin of life fields, tend to underestimate the various evolutionary steps that were required to go from the first proto-cells to LUCA and later on to modern cells (Archaea, Bacteria and Eucarya). This is clear when the authors speak of proteins that have been "attributed to the very early life", including in that category DNA repair and replication proteins. For me these proteins do not testify for the very early life because they could have only appeared after the evolution of very sophisticated ribosomes, at a very late period of early life evolution. If the first life forms indeed originated in ZnS compartments of an hydrothermal vent, I would suggest that the cells that emerged from these vents were primitive cells that started to compete with each others as free living cells in ancestral water ponds and/or in shallow waters of the ancestral oceans. They might have been pre-RNA cells or cells that found a way to protect their RNA against Zinc-induced degradation. This does not dismiss the possibility that the first proteins that replaced ribozymes after the invention of ribosomes mainly inherited zinc ions from the catalytic centers of these ribozymes, or that cells of that time (second age of the RNA world) were still thriving in a rich zinc world.

