Gáspár Jékely has previously played an important role in pointing the importance of the Ran proteins in the origin of the eukaryotic nucleus. He convincingly shown that the eukaryotic nucleus evolved by modification of a pre-existing endomembrane system, strongly supporting the endogenous scenario for the origin of the nucleus. These scenarios contrast with the fashionable idea that the nucleus originated from an archaeal endosymbiont.

Considering that the rRNA and all informational proteins of eukaryotes are very divergent from bacterial ones, suggesting a long periods of evolution after the divergence between these two domains, the simplest endogeneous scenario for the origin for the nucleus is that the nucleus originated in a lineage of pre-eukaryotic cells, before the endosymbiosis that led to the presence of mitochondria in all modern eukaryotes. However, in the present manuscript, Gáspár Jékely adopts an alternative scenario, in which the eukaryotic nucleus originated relatively recently, i.e. between the mitochondrial endosymbiosis and the radiation of major eukaryotic divisions.
To support this assumption, Gáspár refers to a comparative genomic study of Koonin and colleagues (Mans et al., 2004) in which these authors, according to Gáspár, state that « several components of the nuclear pore complex (NPC) and nuclear transport cycle are of probable alphaproteobacterial origin » (Ref 10). This is somewhat confusing, suggesting that Koonin and colleagues have indeed shown (for instance by phylogenetic analysis) that components of the nuclear pore complex have a specific phylogenetic affinity for their alpha-proteobacterial homologues, which is not the case since. In fact, in the abstract of their paper, Koonin and colleagues only state that « NPC and nuclear transport cycle are of probable endosymbiotic origin ». More importantly, this statement is only an hypothesis deduced from their favourite scenario for eukaryotic origin (fusion of an archaeon and the alpha-proteobacterium at the origin of eukaryotes), but it is absolutely not supported by the data. Indeed, NPC proteins have no homologues in bacteria, but only share conserved protein repeated domains with some widely distributed bacterial proteins. This is clear both from the data of Koonin and colleagues and from a paper published one year later by Bapteste and colleagues on the same topic. In their paper, Bapteste et al found 15 distantly related prokaryotic homologues of NCP, all with WD repeated domains and conclude that « an ancient system of transmembrane transport that originated before the separation of the three domains was recruited during early eukaryotic evolution » (Genome Biology, 6/R85, 2005).
Considering the absence of homologues of the NCP proteins in Archaea or Bacteria, it is likely that the nucleus originated in a specific pre-eukaryotic lineage of organisms either ancestral or sister group of Archaea. As repeatedly pointed out by several authors, this also makes senses since eukaryotes have a capacity of phagocytosis that explains well why one of their ancestor was able to engulf the alpha proteobacterion at the origin of mitochondria. The large cells of the pre-eukaryotic lineage should have been already endowed with this properties (phagocytosis), which is unknown in Bacteria or Archaea.
In the framework of the mixed origin of eukaryotes, Gáspár Jékely proposes an elegant explanation for the origin of the nucleus, suggesting that the nuclear membrane emerged progressively to prevent the formation of hybrid, less efficient, ribosomes, containing a mixture of proto-eukaryotic and bacterial ribosomal proteins.
Indeed, he rightly notices that 23 genes encoding bacterial ribosomal proteins (from the endosymbiont) have been transferred to the chromosomes of ancestral eukaryotic cells before the divergence of the major eukaryotic lineages. He then suggests that these transfers corresponds to a neutral phase of eukaryotic evolution that occurred before the formation of the nucleus, leading to chimerism and reduced fitness. This in turn would have triggered a selective pressure to create a barrier separating the eukaryotic ribosome factory from the mitochondrial ribosome factory (the nuclear membrane).

However, in my opinion, there is a major default in this reasoning. The transfer of bacterial ribosomal proteins to the eukaryotic genome could not have not been both neutral and highly deleterious (reducing fitness) !! Accordingly, cells in which these transfers occurred would have been strongly counter-selected and would have simply disappeared. In fact, I think that Gáspár Jékely gives us a strong argument to think that transfer of bacterial genes from the mitochondrion to the eukaryotic genome occurred indeed after the formation of the nucleus. Otherwise, the transfer of mitochondrial ribosomal protein genes (being strongly counter-selected) would have simply never occurred in the first place.
I agree with Gáspár Jékely that one should propose a positive selection pressure for the origin of the nucleus. In my opinion, such positive selection pressure could be the requirement for the cell to protect their genomes from the attack of incoming viruses. Modern viruses replicating in the cytoplasm of eukaryotic cells form nuclear-like structures by recruiting membranes of the endoplasmic reticulum to protect their genomes from the attack of their host. The complex modern nucleus can have originated progressively (possibly through some of the steps described in the Jékely's manuscript) in the interplay between viruses and cells, both eager to protect their genomes from the other by physical segregation. Later on, some viruses have finally managed to replicate inside the eukaryotic nucleus.