Eugene Koonin suggests in this paper to use information from the viral world to reconstruct the evolutionary history of the DNA replication apparatus. I completely agree with his conclusion that "comparisons of viral genomes with the cellular life forms might provide windows into the deep past of lifes's evolution that appear to be out of reach for other approaches". Here, Koonin specifically proposes that DNA polymerases of the B family (Pol B) originated before those of the C family (Pol C). His argument is that Pol B are much more widespread in different groups of organisms (cellular and viral) compared to Pol C (which is restricted to Bacteria and a few bacterial viruses). He suggests that "the earlier diversification of viruses and virus-like entities using DNA Pol B occupied the major existing biological niches and thus prevented any significant diversification of selfish elements carrying Pol C".
The non-uniform distribution of the different DNA polymerases is indeed striking and requires an explanation. The merit of this paper is to focus for the first time on this point. However, the more general question is why Pol B are much more widespread in databases than DNA polymerases of any other families, since DNA Pol A, D, E, X and Y also exhibit a much more restricted distribution than DNA Pol B (Filée et al., 2002). If we apply the logic proposed by Koonin, the conclusion would be that Pol B originated first, followed by Pol A (universal in bacteria and widespread in their viruses, but also present in eukarya), Pol C, Pol D (only in euryarchaea) and Pol E (only in a few archaeal and bacterial plasmid). An enzyme such as the Topo V of Methanopyrus kandleri should be very recent since it has only been discovered in this archaeon (Forterre, 2006)! Such view would be quite simplistic and the real history has been certainly more complex.
The restricted distribution of a particular product of life evolution does not imply per se a more recent origin. For instance, when Neanderthals were still present in a corner of southern Europe, it would have been wrong (in the absence of fossil record) to conclude that Homo sapiens sapiens appeared first and occupied the major existing biological niches, thus prevented any significant diversification of more recent Homo sapiens neanderthalis! A protein with a restricted distribution thus could simply be an ancestral enzyme which has been later on displaced by a more successful functional analogue in the majority of lineages. It can be also a protein which was once widely distributed, but mainly in lineages without descendent today. The distribution of various proteins should be influenced by many factors, including their respective contribution to the fitness of the organisms in which they operate and the respective evolutionary success of the organisms bearing these proteins (two factors that can be either related or completely independent).
Coming back to DNA polymerases, the occurrence of Pol B and C in the three cellular domains cannot tell us much about their history, since we don't know the relative order of appearance of these domains (for instance, even if we were sure of the rooting of the universal tree in the "bacterial branch" the last common ancestor of bacteria might have existed either before or after the last common ancestors of the other two). We should then focus entirely on the viral world to try answering the question, why DNA Pol B are so abundant compared to others DNA polymerases ? This can be explained a priori by several non exclusive hypotheses beside the explanation proposed by Koonin:

1°) Pol B are more efficient than all the others, and thus many non-orthologous displacement occurred in which PolB displaced other DNA polymerases.

2°) there is a strong sampling bias in favour of viruses (plasmids) encoding Pol B in current databases

3°) the cellular hosts of viruses (plasmids) encoding Pol B have been preferentially selected in the game of evolution (for reasons having eventually nothing to do with their DNA polymerases).

I agree with Koonin that there is no reason to believe that Pol B are more efficient for processive DNA replication than Pol A or Pol C. Some Pol A are very efficient (for instance T7 DNA polymerase) and Pol C (at least in the presence of PCNA and other replication factors) can replicate bacterial chromosomes at an extremely high speed.

However, the two other explanations (bias sampling and/or disappearance of ancient hosts) should be seriously taken into consideration. Koonin argues against the idea of a sampling bias because "the sequenced viral genomes already encompass a staggering diversity of gene repertoire and infect hosts from all main division of cellular life". I quite disagree on this point. Most known bacterial viruses infect some groups of proteobacteria, some groups of Gram positive bacteria (firmicutes and mycobacteria) and cyanobacteria, i.e. 4 out of more than 30 bacterial divisions. More than half of the bacterial divisions detected by environmental PCR have no cultivable representative, thus no genome (cellular or viral) are available for these groups. Similarly, only a few archaeal lineages (mostly Sulfolobales and Halobacteriales) have been screened for viruses. In eukaryotes too, most superphyla have not been screened for the presence of viruses. We mainly know viruses of a few animals, plants and green algae.

A glimpse of the hidden virosphere can be obtained by looking at the ORFans in bacterial genomes. These ORFans are probably of viral or plasmid origin (Daubin and Ochman, Genome Res., 2004). However, in a recent analysis, Yin and Fisher (2006) found that only 2.8% of 110,186 bacterial ORFans have viral homologues. Their result suggests to me that we vastly underestimate the diversity of the modern virosphere. One therefore cannot exclude that viruses encoding Pol D or Topo V still exist, or that viruses encoding Pol C are abundant in bacterial, archeal or eukaryotic divisions which have not been studied.
A recent metagenomic analysis by Rohwer and colleagues (Angly et al. 2006) even suggests that Pol C might be in fact even more widespread than Pol B in viruses infecting bacteria. Indeed, these authors found polC genes among the five most abundant enzyme-coding genes in three out of four oceanic viral metagenomes analyzed, whereas they never recovered genes encoding Pol B! Interestingly, they only recover genes encoding the alpha subunit of Pol C, suggesting that in viruses, this enzyme can be very processive alone. The existence of a large reservoir of polC genes in viruses supports the hypothesis that this bacterial replicase was initially recruited from a virus before the diversification of the bacterial domain (Forterre, 1999).
Beside the sampling bias, one cannot exclude the historical bias. Viruses encoding Pol C polymerases might have existed for a very long time (predating or not those with PolB) but most of them might have disappeared with their hosts (except those infecting bacteria). The concept of lost lineages is presently neglected by Koonin and others evolutionists who base their argumentation on the principle of parsimony (see discussion with the reviewers in Koonin et al., 2006). Koonin put forward several time the argument of simplicity in favor of his hypotheses, he tell us that his general view of life history is attractively simple. I think that the path of history is precisely never so simple but usually extremely rich and complex. I would suggest that Koonin and others with similar views are using in fact an extreme form of "actualism", i.e. they want to explain all life evolution from its very beginning to the present state by only considering modern molecules and organisms (either cells or viruses). The combination of archaea and bacteria to produce eucaryotes is characteristic of this viewpoint. Incidentally, if Eukaryotes indeed originated from the association of a bacterium and an archaeon (as supported by Koonin) this paper would have no raison d'être, since all viruses and plasmids from eukaryotes encoding Pol B should be removed from Table ​Table11 (being of archaeal origin). In that case (only two primary domains left), one cannot say that Pol B was prevalent in the ancient living world (before the origin of eukaryotes) since PolC is largely dominant in Bacteria (and probably in their viruses, considering the metagenomic previously discussed). The remaining question then would be, why Pol C (and Pol D) disappeared in Eukaryotes and their viruses?
I don't want to argue here in detail with Koonin about the Martin and Russell hypothesis that life from the very origin to the emergence of Bacteria and Archaea originated and evolved in a single chimney. I would only mention that for me, this hypothesis is another example of extreme actualism (and simplification). Actualism means that you try to explain the past only with your knowledge about the present. This principle has been very powerful to fight the remnants of religious conceptions, especially in geology. However, the use of actualism in historical sciences is always delicate! In my opinion, the correct use of actualism in the present situation is to consider that known evolutionary patterns that occurred "recently" in the history of modern species also occurred much earlier in early life evolution. For example, we know that many lineages have been extinct during the evolution leading from the first animals to the modern fauna. Similarly, many Homo species have disappeared during the evolution leading from the ancestor of all Homo species to modern Homo sapiens. We can thus suppose, from the principle of actualism, that many cellular lineages also disappeared both during the evolution from the first cells to LUCA or from LUCA to the modern cellular world. In my opinion, an example of such lineages was probably the proto-eukaryotic lineages (urkaryote, sensu Woese), which were subsequently eliminated by modern eukaryotes harboring mitochondria (Kurland et al., 2006). Other lineages of ancient cells might have given birth to viruses in the RNA world (Forterre, 2006a). The existence of lost lineages would nicely explain the existence of the viral hallmark genes mentioned by Koonin, i.e. viral genes that are not present in modern cells.

This notion of lost lineages has been clearly depicted by Stephen Jay Gould in his book "Wonderful Life" in which he emphasized the notion of bottleneck, i.e. the fact that at several occasion in the course of evolution, massive extinctions occurred which specifically eliminate the majority of lineages present at that time on our planet. The emergence of Homo sapiens has produced such a bottleneck for the genus Homo by eliminating all other species that previously existed. As a consequence, all future Homo will be descendants of H. sapiens. Similarly, the emergence of LUCA should have produced a major bottleneck in the history of life, since all present cellular organisms originated from this ancestor. Three other bottlenecks probably also occurred at the origin of the three cellular domains.

In summary, I think that we cannot presently really define the order of appearance of Pol B and Pol C because we have still not enough data to correctly estimate the sample bias. Furthermore, our answer to this question will remain speculative forever since we will never be able to fully reconstruct the history of lost lineages.

The notion of lost lineages explains several puzzling observations, including the existence of hallmark viral genes of the combination of "orthologous" and non homologous proteins in the core of the DNA replication apparatus. Koonin and his colleagues explain this combination by the presence of DNA (but no DNA replication) in LUCA. Alternatively, I have suggested that the homologous DNA replication proteins present in the universal protein set were not present in LUCA but delivered by two or three different viruses at the onset of the three domains (Forterre, 2006b).

A final argument proposed by Koonin to suggest that Pol B appeared before Pol C is that the superfamily including Pol B includes the reverse transcriptase and cellular RNA polymerases (likely direct ancestor of cellular DNA polymerases) whereas the superfamily including Pol C includes nucleotidyl transferases (Bailey et al., 2006). However, the superfamily that includes Pol C also includes, beside Pol X and PolE, the PolyA polymerases (template independent RNA polymerase) and CCA adding enzymes (maturation of tRNA). The two superfamilies thus appear to be very old and were probably already diversified in the RNA world (with possibly some yet unknown RNA polymerases in both). Several DNA polymerases have probably originated independently in these two superfamilies from enzymes used in the RNA world.
Although Koonin is still one of the rare evolutionists who fully recognizes the role played by viruses in early evolution (even suggesting that they originated before cells!), I have the feeling that he remains somewhat biased in this paper toward a cellular view of the world. Furthermore, this view is itself strongly biased toward his favourite scenario of cellular evolution. For instance, he divides the DNA replication mechanisms based on either Pol A or Pol C in two families, the "Archaeal-type B family DNA polymerase (either viral or cellular)" and the "Bacterial-type C family DNA polymerase" (especially in Table ​Table1).1). In my opinion, these are not good expressions. The eukaryotic DNA replication mechanisms should not be labelled "Archaeal-type", since they include topoisomerases (Topo IB, Topo IIA) which have no orthologues in Archaea (Gadelle et al., 2003), several Pol B very distantly related to archaeal ones (Filée et al., 2002.) and several proteins involved in the initiation step which have no homologues in Archaea.

Why use the term Archaeal-type instead of eukaryotic type? This came clearly from a gradist view of evolution supported by Koonin and others in which eukaryotes derived from prokaryotes. Another consequence of the emphasis given to the procaryote/eukaryote dichotomy can be see in the expression "prokaryotic and eukaryotic viruses" used in the abstract). This formulation mixes archaeal and bacterial viruses (bacteriophages). As a consequence, archaeal viruses (grouped with bacteriophages) are presented under the headline "bacterial viruses" in the last edition of the viral taxonomy handbook (Fauquet et al., 2005). I suggest to Koonin and others to replace such expression by "viruses infecting archaea, bacteria and eukaryotes".

In the same vein, I found misleading to characterize a viral system by a cellular one and to talk about "viruses replicating with the help of the archaeal system". This reinforces the old conception in which viruses derived their proteins from modern cells. Also strange for me is the sentence "distinct complements of viruses were captured by escaping archaeal and bacterial cells". This formulation gives the active role to the cells, whereas it should be given to the viruses. Here is very helpful the very important advice of Jean-Michel Claverie to focus on the viral factory rather than on the virion, forcing us to consider that viruses are real living organisms which, beside cells, also have an active role in life evolution (Claverie, 2006).
Finally, I have one historical remark. In the Background section, lane 6. Koonin writes that "it came as an extraordinary surprise when comparative genomics ushered in the realization that the protein components of the DNA replication systems are not universally conserved".

Interestingly, this was in fact predicted by Carl Woese and George Fox in 1977 in their very important paper on "The concept of cellular evolution". These two authors quote that "certain enzymes involved in DNA replication should appear quite dissimilar in the two cases (eukaryotes and bacteria) because they predicted that their common ancestor (the progenote) was still a member of the RNA world. The big divide between the two systems became apparent as soon as the genes encoding E. coli DNA Pol III and eukaryotic DNA Pol α, δ or ε became available (see Forterre et al., 1994). However, it is true is that the problem remained largely ignored until the Mushegian, Koonin's PNAS paper of 1996.
Angly, F.E., et al. The marine viromes of four oceanic region, PLoS Biol., 4 (2006)

Bailey, S., Wing, R.A. and Steitz, T. The structure of T. aquaticus DNA polymerase III is distinct from eukaryotic replicative DNA polymerases. Cell.126:893 (2006)

Claverie, J.M. Viruses take center stage in cellular evolution. Genome Biology, 7:110 (2006).

Daubin, V. and Ochman, H. Start-up entities in the origin of new genes. Curr Opin Genet Dev 14:616 (2004)

Fauquet, C. et al. Virus Taxonomy. VIII edition, San Diego and London, Elsevier, Academic Press (2005)

Filée, J., Forterre, P., Sen-Li, T. and Laurent, J. Evolution of DNA polymerase families: evidences for multiple gene exchange between cellular and viral proteins. J. Mol. Evol., 54, 763 (2002)

Forterre, P. DNA topoisomerase V: a new fold of mysterious origin. Trends in Biotechnology, 24, 245 (2006)

Forterre, P. Displacement of cellular proteins by functional analogues from plasmids or viruses could explain puzzling phylogenies of many DNA informational proteins Mol. Microbiol. 33, 457 (1999)

Forterre, P. The origin of viruses and their possible roles in major evolutionary transitions Virus Res. 117(1):5–16 (2006a)

Forterre, P. Three RNA cells for ribosomal lineages and three DNA viruses to replicate their genomes: a hypothesis for the origin of cellular domain Proc. Natl Acad Sci U S A. 103:3669 (2006b)

Forterre, P., et al., M. Evolution of DNA topoisomerases and DNA polymerases : A perspective from Archaea. System. Appl. Microbiol. 16, 746 (1994).

Gadelle, D., Filée, J., Bukher, C. and Forterre, P. Phylogenomics of Type II DNA topoisomerases Bioassays. 25: 232 (2003)

Koonin EV, Senkevich TG, Dolja VV.The ancient Virus World and evolution of cells. Biol Direct. 1:29 (2006)

Kurland CG, Collins LJ, Penny D.Genomics and the irreducible nature of eukaryote cells. Science. 312:1011 (2006)

Mushegian, A.R. Koonin, E.V. A minimal gene set for cellular life derived by comparison of complete bacterial genomes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 93:10268 (1996)

Woese, C.R. and Fox G. The concept of cellular evolution. J Mol Evol. 10:1 (1977)

Yin, Y. and Fischer, D. On the origin of microbial ORFans: quantifying the strength of the evidence for viral lateral transfer. BMC Evol Biol. 16: 63 (2006).