Summary : The authors present novel (network) methods to address diversity in envirnomental sequences. The paper is very interesting and technically an important step in the right direction to explore more of what we do not know about environmental microbial diversity. It can be published as is in my view, some language editing by a native speaker would help, I listed some but by no means all style and usage problems below.

Recommandations:

p. 1.

l. 30 life levels? reword, not clear

l 43, tres of life — > phylogenetic trees

papers should be line numbered continuously in the future, please, makes commenting easier.

life division — > divisions of life

have been constant progresses — has been constant progress

obsidian Pool , capitalization

polymorphism. 30 % of the genes — > polymorphism. Thirty percent of the genes (never start a sentence with a numeral)

Likewise, in 2005, Chouari et al. : reference number?

In 2012, Narasingarao et al. : reference number?

it seems that one could in principle come up with some novel microbial lineages, at various levels of the biological classification — > novel microbial lineages are being discovered through environmental sequencing.

microbial dark universe : was dark matter already introduced?

these data are amongst the most numerous — > these data are amongst the most abundant

seeked to identify --- sought to identify

families fulfilled these --- families fulfilling these

protocole---protocol

important amount of microbial divergent genes --- substantial number of divergent microbial genes

proved its efficiency to unravel --- was efficient in uncovering

such gene families ! --- why !

In either case, the host lineage of the divergent environmental genes would be

439 distantly related to known organismal lineages in a way that may challenge our

knowledge in evolutionary 440 microbiology. As a follow up of this proof of concept

441 analysis, it would next be interesting to perform larger comparative studies, with

442 expanded datasets, including more sequences from cultured organisms and from more

443 environments, this new dataset might identify other ancient, divergent, rarely

444 transferred between domains gene families.

Sorry, is that essential and what is it supposed to mean?

theories on the origins of eukaryotes [41] -- Woese did not revolutionize theories for eukaryote origin, he (co-)discovered archae(bacteri)a and introduced the concept of microbial phylogeny.