This is an interesting and worthwhile paper reporting calculations aimed to date major events in eukaryote evolution using a molecular clock approach to rare genomic changes. The authors use a multiplicity of methods, and get a range of values, which they openly report. Any criticism that could be leveled at molecular clocks of substitutions could be applied here. The authors recognize that, hence there is no need to get into the technical aspects of molecular dating approaches.

I have only a few points to discuss.

1. First, Bangiomorpha is probably the best early calibration point there is, and the authors even report here the unpublished Pb-Pb age of the fossil. Yes it is a single fossil, but it is probably the best early plant (red alga), and the authors basically throw it out, reporting estimates for major events in the abstract from analyses that exclude Bangiomorpha. In my opinion, this is a mistake, and it is the same mistake that Philippe made in ref 22, and that is why the present sets of estimates are so similar to those in ref 22. At the end of results we see much more reasonable ages for LECA, more compatible with the Javaux et al 1.45 Ga (billion years ago) material. The justification for excluding Bangiomorpha (a single find, yes, but well dates and exquisitely preserved) is not sound in my view. My inkling would be to report those dates using 1.2 Ga for plants in the abstract, too, and put suppl. information on the Bangiomorpha-based dates in the main text, not in the supplementary where no one will see it. As it stands, the best constrained early fossil is incompatible with dates put forth in this paper.

2. I just outlined how Bangiomorpha was dismissed, and that that led to early dates. But, the dates are also too young to accommodate Tapannia and other finds from Javaux et al. dated at 1.45 (On the basis of better preserved material, Butterfield has reinterpreted Tappania from ref 26 as possibly being a fungus. Butterfield NJ (2005) Probable Proterozoic fungi. Paleobiology; v. 31; no. 1; p. 165-182). The criticism is severe, it is this: For Bangiomorpha, the authors opted to basically throw out the fossil because it does not fit their dates (when their dates actually should have been included that fossil in my view); for Javaux et al. ref 26, 1.45 Ga, the fossil material also does not fit their dates, but in THIS case the authors opt to interpret this as evidence for a long period of eukaryote evolution before the major modern groups appear. This is very inconsistent reasoning. Were they to be consistent, they would either have to a) throw out any unassignable acritarchs like those of ref 26 (too), just like they throw out Bangiomorpha or b) include Bangiomoprpha in which case 1.45 Ga material would no longer be outside the range. In the case of a) they loose their title and abstract evidence for extinct eukaryotic microbes (or "late" extant ones) because they would no longer accept the ref 26 or similar material as eukaryotes, putting them very close to Cavalier-Smith in terms of eukaryote age. In the case of b) everything is more or less normal, making this paper less of a splash perhaps but more consistent piece of work.

3. Supplementary table 6 says "with or without the red alga" but only one set of values is reported, presumably "without", because the ranges cannot possibly correspond to the LECA data in Suppl8. Or maybe I have missed something altogether here, which brings me to another point.

4. There are 10 supplemental files upon which the text and the arguments (hence the fabric of paper) rely. This annoyingly makes the referee and the reader click around through 12 windows to try to read the paper. I am tired of doing that anymore, and I think I am not alone. If I am not mistaken, J. Neurosci. has stopped accepting supplemental altogether, and that is a lead that one can consider. Biol. Direct is not printed, why not put all of the data that is essential to the paper in the paper and take out the stuff that is not essential? The axis labels in the Supplemental are problematic is several spots.

Points 1 and 2 seem severe in my view. My hunch is that many readers will see it similarly. Maybe I am wrong.