This is a fascinating paper that builds on the recent comprehensive review by Rodin & Rodin in Heredity (2008; vol. 100: 341–355). The key idea presented here by Rodin, Szathmáry & Rodin is that the genetic code (i.e. that associated with codons in the genetic material, and anticodons on tRNA) and the operational code (whereby tRNAs are correctly charged by aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases) share a single origin. Furthermore, the authors argue that on current data it seems reasonable to conclude that aminoacylation predated cooption of primordial 'tRNAs' into translation.

For readers who have not already read the Heredity paper, I can recommend reading that first because much of the material in the early part of the current paper is covered in greater detail there. There is some overlap, but on balance I think this is necessary so as to adequately introduce key background concepts, along with several important recent developments; unfortunately, to permit the authors to adequately focus on the newer ideas presented here, some of the review material from the Heredity article is covered in a condensed form, which may make the paper difficult to follow for those who do not already know the earlier body of work. Still, I think this is more a consequence of the complexity and size of the topic being addressed than it is some shortcoming of the current paper.

Overall, I think the ideas presented here are plausible, and extremely interesting, and the authors indicate a productive path that may be taken in order to arrive at a clearer understanding of the origins of the genetic code. The argument that the two codes originated as a single code is elegant, and the available data do seem to support this contention. One interesting aspect is the further development of the coding coenzyme handle hypothesis within the context of the RNA operational code. In particular, the order in which amino acids seem to have been coopted into the modern code strengthens the idea that the earliest usage of amino acids attached to RNA was in biosynthetic and catalytic roles. A number of authors have previously argued that an origin for the ribosome and tRNAs in replication seems likely. Considering briefly the genomic tag hypothesis in the context of the current work, perhaps one shortcoming of that model is that it is not clear a broad repertoire of charged tRNAs need evolve, nor is an obvious explanation forthcoming concerning the stepwise addition of amino acids to the genetic code. In contrast, the biosynthetic/coenzyme view espoused by Rodin, Szathmáry & Rodin does provide that perspective, and is a welcome development; the model presented here is on far firmer ground than the convenient ordering of extant examples of viral replication into a progression in an attempt to account for the evolution of tRNA, as per the genomic tag hypothesis. Having said that, I don't see an obvious conflict between the idea that the decoding function of the ribosome was initially involved in replication, nor that charged 'tRNAs' could have been coopted into replication at some point in the evolution of this process.

One matter I wanted to briefly comment on regards the possibility that the first genetically-encoded proteins may have been RNA 'chaperones' [71]. In this model, exact sequences would have been less important than general attributes such as positive charge (thereby permitting binding to and stabilisation of existing ribozymes or functional RNAs). One aspect of that idea that bugged me was that amino acids such as arginine, which is prominent in a wide range of RNA-binding motifs, and glutamine, which can improve binding affinity (see [70]) are not among the amino acids consistently argued to be the earliest additions to the genetic code. Yet the emergence of low complexity peptides where exact sequence order would not be crucial to function seems far more plausible than the old idea that the first proteins would have been catalysts. Rodin, Szathmáry & Rodin proposal that the acceptor stem likely predates the anticodon loop, together with the recognition that the two codes could have a single origin, is interesting in this context in that it seems likely that a significant repertoire of charged tRNAs would have predated protein synthesis, so my impression is that there really is no conflict between code evolution and an RNA chaperone function for the earliest genetically-encoded proteins; these may have been largely separate and independent events.

A minor fact let for the discussion on page 12: in vitro RNA selection experiments have been published that indicate ribozymes can perform aminoacylation (Lee, N., Bessho, Y., Wei, K., Szostak, J.W., and Suga, H. 2000. Ribozyme-catalyzed tRNA aminoacylation. Nat. Struct. Biol. 7: 28–33.)

Finally, I did raise an eyebrow at the use of ancestral sequence reconstruction in this work, but I don't think it's crucial to the result reported here; it seems that there is substantial overlap between consensus sequences and the results from ancestral sequence reconstruction, and as the aim is to try and extract some indication of the presence of a functionally-important motif at the acceptor end of the tRNAs, I think the approach used is probably sufficient for the stated aim.

It may be useful to provide more detail on the ancestral sequence reconstruction procedure – for instance, stating that the trees were rooted (see Additional files 1, 2, 3 and 4). Furthermore, it wasn't clear to me whether the manual reconstruction was solely using parsimony. I presume this was the case, but it would help to be explicit.
