The main point of this paper is to put forth a scenario for the nature of the Last Universal Common Ancestor (LUCA) as a complex, protoeukaryotic lineage with an RNA genome and nuclear compartmentation. If I understand correctly, the argument is built on the proposal, adapted from Woese's Universal Ancestor model (ref. 9 in the paper) that there was an extremely diverse community of cells from which the three domains emerged. Woese's model is that rates of horizontal gene transfer were extremely high early in the evolution of life, and that transfer rates became lower with time, eventually leading to 'crystallisation' of the three domains independently from this early state. As far as I can tell, the authors are comfortable with this interpretation, and take this scenario as their starting point. However Glansdorff, Xu & Labedan's model diverges considerably from other published scenarios in several important ways. First, while they appear happy with high rates of gene transfer very early, they see a minor – perhaps marginal – role for horizontal gene transfer after 'crystallisation' (the term Woese uses in his model to refer to the distinct emergence of lineages which have become refractory to further gene transfer). Glansdorff and colleagues also argue that reductive evolution and themoreduction had an important role in shaping bacteria and archaea, respectively, and that, because the eukaryote lineage is argued not to have been subject to such reductive evolution, many traits within this domain are ancestral (read: features of the LUCA). A central part of their model is that differential gene loss has played a major role in shaping the differences between the three domains of life.

The authors succinctly summarise their opinions in ten points in the final conclusions section, which is much appreciated, since it is an unwieldy manuscript at times (though there are some wonderful insights among some more well-trodden material – the quizzical air in which zygogenesis is brought up (why haven't proponents of fusion been all over this?) and the anticipatory remarks that serve to castrate any use of this observation (don't even think of trying to stretch it that far), make for informative reading). All of these are interesting points; some have been made before, and some are updated and extended here. There are certainly some contentious ideas among these which many workers will find difficult to accept.

I separate my review into more mundane editorial material and material I think warrants discussion.

I think the manuscript could be shortened, and is in need of editing for language. I recommend shortening the discussion of the term 'prokaryote', and think it is better to incoporate one or two brief points into one of the other sections, rather than devote an entire section to what is fast becoming a rather tiresome semantic debate. The section 'Eukaryote gene promoters...' is, on the other hand, so short as to be uninformative. Please either review this material so that the general argument can be understood, or delete it.

Concerning the section on 'Paleochemistry', I have heard that concern has been expressed by one of the authors of the Brocks et al. study (ref 61) that the lanostane was a contaminant. Tellingly, Brocks does not cite that original paper in a recent review on using molecular biomarkers to examine deep evolutionary history (Brocks & Pearson 2005, Reviews in Mineralogy & Geochemistry, 59:233–258), but I have also heard that the contaminant verdict is not universally shared by all authors. This verges on gossip, but it might be worth contacting the senior authors of that study (Brocks, Summons) to ask what their current opinions are.

The section, 'Emergence of life, complexity and order' seems a bit vague, and quite disconnected from the rest of the manuscript. If it were my manuscript, I would cut this section out.

I now turn to the key ideas which I think warrant a response.

For Glansdorff and colleagues, the puzzling gene distributions that many have attributed to horizontal gene transfer are better explained by differential loss of paralogues. This, they argue, explains most incongruence between phylogenetic trees. So, rather than rejecting the tree of life outright on the basis of concluding that horizontal gene transfer is far too prevalent (as some have recently advocated) these authors instead argue that their model (gene loss) predicts the patchy distribution of genes and traits that is observed.

This is a rather bold stance to take, and is interesting insofar as it represents the other end of the spectrum from the proposal that there is no tree of life. Personally, I don't subscribe to either extreme scenario, though there is certainly room for both mechanisms (i.e. gene loss and horizontal gene transfer). Glansdorff et al, while clearly disliking the arguments in favour of extensive, ongoing transfer, nevertheless concede that, in most cases, it would be difficult to distinguish between loss or transfer. Indeed, given that we have no good scheme for weighting the relative probabilities of multiple losses of cryptically paralogous functionally redundant genes versus distant gene transfers, this is true. For both mechanisms, there are good examples, but the argument here is whether most cases can be explained as being down to one mechanism or the other. Confidence probably does run a bit on the high side among some proponents of extensive horizontal gene transfer, at least judging by some of the more extreme statements that have been made in the recent literature, but is the other extreme any more informative?

It is in a sense an irony that the model Glansdorff et al. present, which reads as being fairly hostile towards gene transfer (at least between domains), is nevertheless entirely dependent on it. By favouring Woese's scenario of high rates of gene transfer prior to the emergence of the three domains, Glansdorff et al. can have their cake (or in their case, potato) and eat it too – a totipotent ancestral community of genes but without the burgeoning genome size. I will limit myself here to the following point: while Woese's ideas have become popular, there really is no evidence for higher rates of gene transfer early (i.e. pre-three domains). I for one have a hard time seeing how this scenario of one interconnected gene pool with unconstrained gene transfer fits with our understanding of biological systems. I am fine with gene transfer between modern lineages, but less convinced that the hypothetical scenario Woese proposes has any firm basis in biology and likewise concerned that it is sufficiently vague as to permit rather divergent interpretations. If we need to accept one speculative scenario to accept the other, the second can come down like a house of cards. Better then to argue for a role for the mechanism of gene loss, though not in this extreme manner. Seen in this light, their description of the carbamoyltransferase dataset is useful, but I think it might help if the authors were to address the relevance of this single example of paralogous gene loss more explicitly and in more detail; i.e. how much more of the data do they think can be explained unambiguously as losses? The authors do cite a handful of examples, but those who argue for a significant role for horizontal transfer make bold statements, as embodied in the phrase, 'the tree of one percent' coined by Dagan & Martin (2006; Genome Biology 7:e118).

A novel proposal that Glansdorff et al. present is the idea that LUCA (or some subpopulation of the 'community') may have been nucleate. The implication here is that LUCA possessed a nucleus, and that this was lost from the archaea and bacteria, with a handful of lineages perhaps retaining this cellular architecture (notably the Planctomycetes). I certainly agree that some current explanations for the origin of the nucleus are insufficient and have myself published critiques of some of these recently. I also agree that, formally, we cannot actually tell when the nucleus arose, since we cannot readily distinguish between multiple losses from an earlier ancestral nucleate state and a single gain in the lineage leading to modern eukaryotes. So, yes, it is entirely possible that LUCA had a nucleus, but currently there is not a shred of evidence that can be brought to bear on that possibility. I think that Planctomycetes and other 'prokaryotic' lineages are fascinating, but until we can establish whether their internal membrane structures are homologous or analogous to those in eukaryotes, one cannot really use them as leverage to favour an ancestral nucleate LUCA. I get the impression that this is an ulterior motive behind the paleochemistry section, i.e. citing the Pearson et al. paper (ref. 63) on sterol synthesis in Planctomycetes. Again, I am not so sure the data as they are can be used to argue for vestigial traces of a protoeukaryote LUCA among the biology of modern planctomycetes. If there's one thing I would like to know, it is the authors' opinion of the model published by Devos et al. (2004; PLoS Biol 2:e380), which is, to my mind one of the most interesting models for the origin of the nucleus, and should be addressed in any discussion of the origins of this organelle.

I do agree that some features of modern eukaryotes are likely to resemble equivalent features in LUCA, and that some features of modern eukaryotes more closely resemble the ancestral state than do prokaryotic equivalents. This is of course just normal pedestrian evolutionary biology, and, as Glansdorff et al. clearly state, Darwinian thinking (i.e. not presuming, a priori, to know the ancestral state, and, accepting, that we cannot, a priori, ascertain in which lineages we might find the ancestral state, if at all) is preferable to applying Lamarckian notions of 'progress'. However, I do not think this means that we can necessarily extrapolate to other features of eukaryotes, such that 'protoeukaryotes' become the ancestral state. In this regard, I disagree with Glansdorff et al. in that I do not see any evidence that LUCA (or some subpopulation) was phagotrophic. Certainly, this is possible (and once again I am in principle open to this possibility), but, as with the nucleus, there is to my knowledge no evidence that can be used to support such a contention.

The other ideas described in this paper, as summarised in the conclusions as a set of 10 points, either draw from the work of others, or from the authors' own published work, and I think there is no need for me to comment particularly on this synthesis – I feel disinclined to critique the critique, or advocate the advocacy (or the possible variants thereof), as I think it would largely just serve as a reflection of my own opinions. Overall, I think this synthesis makes for interesting reading, though doubtless there is something in here for everyone to disagree on – such is the nature of the field!