I am fine with the main argument. However, it is not new to the literature, and is not as crisply delivered as previous treatises, including some which the author cites.

This philosophical piece by Wentao Ma is a discussion of the definition of life. Ma covers well-trodden territory, arguing primarily for a Darwinian definition of life.

While I don’t particularly disagree with the main points, the paper really doesn’t cover any new ground, and in my view, other papers do a better job of dealing with this topic. For instance, Szathmáry makes a very helpful distinction between replicators and reproducers [19]. In contrast, Ma uses the terms replication and reproduction interchangeably. This is not helpful and serves to blur an important distinction between these. The point made by Ma, that life requires three ‘mechanisms’ (replication of a template, generation of functional molecules, and a physical boundary) is fine, but not new, and does not advance current thinking. This is nicely articulated in Ganti’s chemoton model, which consists of three parts (metabolic system, system for heritable control, a boundary system) [21]. Importantly, the chemoton model led to the concept of infrabiological systems (see [19]), which lack one of these three components, and is a helpful formulation for understanding the emergence of life. Mix [22] provides clearer categorical definitions than Ma, who is primarily interested in Darwinian evolution. Ma draws a distinction between ‘life form’ and ‘living entity’, where the first seems to be ‘Darwin life’ and the second is ‘Haldane life’ by Mix’s definitions. Note that Mix provides a third definition that neatly enables us to categorise all cellular life as ‘Woese life’, and also notes that multiple definitions may be applied to some entities. Finally, it is unfortunate that Ma uses the term ‘magic’ in several places - this is both vague and unhelpful. I would encourage the author to take the time to rethink their article with reference to the works [19, 21, 22] (as well as those cited within these key works).