Origin of the nucleus and Ran-dependent transport to safeguard ribosome biogenesis in a chimeric cell
Abstract
Background
The origin of the nucleus is a central problem about the origin of eukaryotes. The common ancestry of nuclear pore complexes (NPC) and vesicle coating complexes indicates that the nucleus evolved via the modification of a pre-existing endomembrane system. Such an autogenous scenario is cell biologically feasible, but it is not clear what were the selective or neutral mechanisms that had led to the origin of the nuclear compartment.

Results
A key selective force during the autogenous origin of the nucleus could have been the need to segregate ribosome factories from the cytoplasm where ribosomal proteins (RPs) of the protomitochondrium were synthesized. After its uptake by an anuclear cell the protomitochondrium transferred several of its RP genes to the host genome. Alphaproteobacterial RPs and archaebacterial-type host ribosomes were consequently synthesized in the same cytoplasm. This could have led to the formation of chimeric ribosomes. I propose that the nucleus evolved when the host cell compartmentalised its ribosome factories and the tightly linked genome to reduce ribosome chimerism. This was achieved in successive stages by first evolving karyopherin and RanGTP dependent chaperoning of RPs, followed by the evolution of a membrane network to serve as a diffusion barrier, and finally a hydrogel sieve to ensure selective permeability at nuclear pores. Computer simulations show that a gradual segregation of cytoplasm and nucleoplasm via these steps can progressively reduce ribosome chimerism.

Conclusion
Ribosome chimerism can provide a direct link between the selective forces for and the mechanisms of evolving nuclear transport and compartmentalisation. The detailed molecular scenario presented here provides a solution to the gradual evolution of nuclear compartmentalization from an anuclear stage.

Background
The nuclear compartment is the defining universal feature of eukaryotic cells. The recently recognized structural similarity of nuclear pore complex (NPC) components and vesicle coat complexes (including COPI, COPII and clathrin coats) indicates that NPCs and the nuclear envelope (NE) evolved by the modification of a vesicle-trafficking system [1,2]. This supports autogenous scenarios for the origin of the nucleus [3]. These models posit that the NE evolved by the incomplete fusion of pre-existing secretory endomembranes around the chromatin of a protoeukaryotic cell [4], and not via endosymbiosis [5].

Unlike e.g. the ER or peroxisomes, the nucleus is not a topologically separated compartment in the eukaryotic cytoplasm since the nucleoplasm and the cytoplasm are continuous through the nuclear pores. Yet, the nucleus has a distinct composition due to the directionality and selectivity of nuclear transport. This is achieved by the Ran GTPase cycle, selective cargo binding by karyopherins, and selective permeability of NPCs [6-8]. The nucleus is organized around chromatin through the action of the Ran GTPase system that is universally present in eukaryotes [9,10]. Eukaryotes evolved the Ran system very early during their evolution to mark the position of chromatin. The evolution of the Ran system had key importance during the origin of nuclear compartmentalisation given the universal and fundamental roles of Ran in several aspects of nuclear function, including nuclear transport [11], NPC assembly [12], NE assembly [13], kinetochore function [14] and mitosis [15]. Ran evolved from other membrane-trafficking small GTPases that all act as molecular switches and orchestrate downstream molecular events by binding to effector molecules in their GTP-bound form [16]. RanGTP could have initially regulated membrane traffic or a primitive anuclear form of mitosis [9]. Without Ran and a directional and selective nuclear transport the nucleus would not exist. To understand the origin of nuclear compartmentalisation we therefore have to understand the co-evolution of nuclear identity (Ran system), nuclear membranes, and selective nuclear transport.

Recently, it has been proposed that the uptake of the precursor of mitochondria, an alphaproteobacterium triggered nuclear compartmentalisation by infecting a host archaebacterial cell with type II introns [17]. Although this model is attractive, objections can be made why uncontrolled intron spread could not have happened in an archaebacterial host cell without meiotic sex [18]. The intron spread model also fails to account for the origin of selective nuclear transport.

Here I propose a model that explains the origin of all three key elements of nuclear compartmentalisation, i.e. nuclear identity, nuclear membranes, and selective nuclear transport. I argue that the protoeukaryotic lineage, originating as a sister group to crown archaebacteria [4,19], evolved a nucleus to compartmentalise its ribosome factories. This was vital to prevent chimerism between host ribosomes and host-encoded RPs of the protomitochondrium. Efficient segregation could only be achieved by the evolution of the Ran system to spatially mark chromatin, of karyopherins to chaperon RPs, and of selective valves (the NPCs) to regulate nuclear permeability. This model proposes a causal link between the evolution of the nuclear compartment and the acquisition of the mitochondrial ancestor, in agreement with the intron-spread model. Ribosome chimerism, however, also provides a direct link between the selective forces driving compartmentalisation and the evolution of the cellular mechanisms achieving it.

Results and discussion
Chimeric ribosome formation in an anuclear protoeukaryotic cell
Mitochondria originated before the radiation of eukaryotes given that all extant eukaryotes have or their ancestors once had mitochondria [20-24]. It is also clear that extensive gene transfer from the protomitochondrial symbiont to the host cell's genome during the early stages of symbiosis made a major contribution to the origin of eukaryotes [25]. Whether mitochondria originated during a stage where the host cell was still anuclear cannot be ascertained based on comparative genomic, phylogenetic or other evidence. However, the phyletic distribution of some NPC and nuclear transport cycle components suggests that they are of probable symbiotic origin [10]. This would mean that the acquisition of mitochondria overlapped with or predated the evolution of the nucleus.

The present model starts with an anuclear protoeukaryote that already possessed an endomembrane system and acquired the protomitochondrium. The symbiont started to be converted into an organelle by the processes of endosymbiotic gene transfer and host control. A survey of all mitochondrial genomes indicates that the genes that were transferred to the host genome in the period before the radiation of crown eukaryotes (i.e. in the stem eukaryotic lineage) also included 24 genes encoding mitochondrial-RPs (L3, L4, L7/12, L9, L13, L15, L17, L21, L22, L24, L25/23, L28, L29, L30, L33, L35, S5, S6, S9, S15, S16, S17, S18, S21). The transfer of ribosomal genes at an anuclear stage would have meant that mitochondrial-RPs were synthesized in the same cytoplasmic compartment where host ribosomes were synthesized and assembled [4]. The two types of RPs (archaebacterial/eukaryotic type of the host and eubacterial type of the protomitochondrium) can form chimeric ribosomes, as shown by biochemical studies of extant eu- and archaebacteria ribosomes [26-30]. Mapping the 24 ancestrally host-encoded mitochondrial-RPs to the structure of the 70S ribosome [31] highlights the scale of the problem (Figure ​(Figure1).1). The potential incorporation of up to 24 different mitochondrial-RPs instead of host-RPs upon subunit assembly could have produced chimeric ribosomes with reduced or no function. The suboptimal functioning of chimeric ribosomes is supported by the rarity of evolutionary gene replacement between cytoplasmic and organellar RPs [32], as opposed to metabolic enzymes [33] or tRNA synthases [34]. The chimeric cell therefore faced the problem of distinguishing and sorting two sets of RPs that were synthesized in the same compartment.

A RanGTP-dependent karyopherin system can reduce chimerism at an anuclear stage
The ribosome chimera load, resulting from the fixation of slightly deleterious individual RP gene transfers from symbiont to host created selective pressure to reduce chimerism. Compensatory advantageous mutations that reduced chimerism and restored fitness started to spread. The back-transfer of mitochondrial-RP genes after the loss of the original mitochondrial copy and the acquisition of mitochondrial targeting signals was not possible. This unidirectionality (gene transfer ratchet) stems from the fact that whereas mitochondrial genes can integrate into the host genome following lysis of mitochondria, there is no mechanism for reverse transfer. As shown below, invoking a selective pressure to reduce ribosome chimerism, the model can explain key steps in the origin of nuclear compartmentalisation.

In the first evolutionary stage described by the model, the protoeukaryotic cell was still anuclear. The genome was attached to an evolving endomembrane system [4,9]. Host ribosomes were assembled around chromatin because assembly was seeded on the transcribing host rRNAs. Mitochondrial-RPs were synthesized in the cytoplasm and could freely diffuse to the chromatin region and incorporate into host ribosomes, leading to the formation of chimeric ribosomes. Ribosome chimerism was reduced when the cell evolved mechanisms to enrich host-RPs around chromatin. This involved the evolution of the Ran system as a chromatin mark and its employment to influence the distribution of free RPs in the cell. Ran evolved its ability to mark the position of chromatin when its exchange factor (RCC1) acquired chromatin localization. The localized GDP to GTP exchange created a region in the cytoplasm with higher RanGTP concentration. The chromatin-enriched RanGTP could reduce ribosome chimerism. It is sufficient to invoke a chaperone system binding to free RPs and that RanGTP regulated these RP-chaperon complexes. When RanGTP could selectively dissociate host-RP-chaperon complexes but not mitochondrial-RP-chaperon complexes, host-RPs enriched around chromatin. These ribosomal chaperons (hereafter called karyopherins) are conceived as the ancestors of the karyopherin family of nuclear transport receptors that still retain chaperon activity [35].

Computer simulations using the program Virtual Cell with a spatial reaction-diffusion model show that an increasing influence of RanGTP on karyopherin-RP dissociation can progressively reduce chimera load (Figure ​(Figure2).2). The spatial model used in the simulations has a cytoplasmic domain with a central chromatin region and peripheral mitochondria (Figure ​(Figure2A).2A). RCC1, the exchange factor of Ran, is localized to the surface of chromatin and is not diffusible. The reaction-diffusion system consisting of localized GDP to GTP exchange and uniform GTP hydrolysis by Ran (stimulated by RanGAP) creates a RanGTP gradient with its maximum around chromatin (Figure ​(Figure2B).2B). This RanGTP gradient can then influence the distribution of RPs. One host and one mitochondrial-RP were modelled, both bound by a uniformly distributed karyopherin. Due to the dissociation of host-RP-karyopherin complexes by RanGTP, host-RPs enrich around chromatin (Figure ​(Figure2C).2C). This results in the local decrease in mitochondrial-RP to host-RP ratio, which was used as a measure of chimerism (Figure ​(Figure2D).2D). The evolution of this RanGTP driven host-RP-karyopherin dissociation (RanGTP + host-RP-karyopherin => RanGTP-karyopherin + host-RP) could have efficiently reduced chimerism as shown with four simulations using an increasing forward rate constant for the reaction (Figure ​(Figure2D).2D). These results show that an emerging RanGTP-karyopherin system could have reduced ribosome chimerism even without a NE and NPCs.

An open NE limits diffusion and sharpens the RanGTP gradient
The next key step in the evolution of nuclear compartmentalisation was the development of a membrane network around chromatin from the secretory endomembrane system of the protoeukaryote. The evolution of the NE from pre-existing, dynamic endomembranes is strongly supported by the evolutionary relationship between NPC components and vesicle coat complexes [1,2]. If the NE evolved from intracellular membranes (and not e.g. from a symbiont's membrane), as these studies strongly suggest, then there was necessarily a stage with an open NE surrounding chromatin, without well developed NPCs. Clearly such an open membrane network without NPCs could not have maintained selective nuclear transport and therefore a compositionally distinct nuclear compartment. On the other hand, NPCs embedded in the NE, could only have evolved when a membrane network was already present around chromatin. This problem can only be resolved by supposing that a primordial, open NE initially evolved around chromatin for reasons other than supporting NPC-dependent transport. Here I suggest that the primordial open NE initially served as a diffusion barrier that created a sharper RanGTP gradient. This contributed to the definition of the evolving nucleoplasm and further reduced ribosome chimerism. Virtual Cell simulations using identical parameters but three different geometries (Figure 3A–C) show that an open membrane system increases RanGTP concentration around chromatin and sharpens the RanGTP gradient (Figure 3D–G). The higher RanGTP levels increase the localised release of host-RPs from karyopherin and further reduce the chimera load (Figure ​(Figure3H).3H). Furthermore, the sharper RanGTP distribution also sharpens the distribution of host-RPs and makes it more uniform in the ribosome factories.

Importantly, the effect of an open NE on RanGTP distribution is not equivalent to generally increasing RanGTP levels in the cell. This could be achieved e.g. by reducing RanGAP levels (from 1 to 0.2 μm, Figure ​Figure3G)3G) and thereby GTP hydrolysis by Ran. This would lead to an increase in RanGTP levels also in the non-chromatin regions of the cytoplasm and would blur the distinction between chromatin and non-chromatin regions of the cell (Figure ​(Figure3G).3G). An open membrane network around chromatin on the contrary leads to a local increase in RanGTP concentration and therefore the further differentiation of cytoplasm and nucleoplasm. This diffusional effect on RanGTP distribution, even without selective nuclear transport, is the likely selective cause for the evolution of a dense membrane network around chromatin. This membrane network subsequently served as the scaffold for the formation of NPCs.

Evolution of a selective hydrogel sieve at nuclear pores
The evolution of a dense membrane network was the precondition for the evolution of NPCs and selective nuclear transport. NPCs evolved by the modification of membrane coating complexes of the developing eukaryotic endomembrane system [1]. These complexes initially probably functioned in shaping the open membrane network around chromatin and in preventing its complete fusion [4]. Selectively permeable NPCs evolved as these coat complexes developed a meshwork of natively unfolded FG repeats in the holes of the n-torus (where n is the number of pores). FG nucleoporins can evolve quickly [36] and repeat expansion could have rapidly created a dense meshwork of FG repeats during the origin of NPCs. This meshwork further limited diffusion between the two sides of the NE. As the FG network started to form crosslinks and became a hydrogel [37,38], it was no longer permeable to larger molecules. Only transport carriers (karyopherins) and cargo bound to them evolved the capacity to selectively permeate the pores. RanGTP dissociated the karyopherin-cargo complexes that traversed the pores at the nuclear side.

As NPCs progressively closed up, other nuclear cargos also had to be imported specifically. These secondary cargo proteins evolved nuclear localization signals (NLS) that mimicked the sequences used by karyopherins to recognize host-RPs. Given that RPs are the most basic proteins in the cell, some of these recognition sequences could have been short basic stretches of amino acids generally occurring in RPs. These motifs had to be refined to allow specific recognition of individual host-RPs, alternatively, some host-RPs evolved novel regions for karyopherin binding. These include for example L25 that has an extra N-terminal NLS-carrying region, absent from archaebacterial homologues [39]. Some other cargoes, including DNA-binding proteins, could have easily evolved NLSs by the slight modification of their basic DNA-binding regions.

At this stage several processes had to evolve simultaneously. Nuclear export pathways evolved in parallel with import pathways. Following gene duplications two karyopherin types evolved, one for import and one for export. Contrary to import karyopherins, the export karyopherins bound cargo in the presence of RanGTP. The RanGTP gradient was further sharpened when RanGAP became predominantly cytoplasmic by acquiring export signals. Further differentiation of cytoplasm and nucleoplasm occurred when the assembly of 80S ribosomes was prevented in the nucleus and the large and small subunits were exported separately using a Crm1 and RanGTP-dependent mechanism [40,41]. This restricted protein synthesis to the cytoplasmic side.

In the final stage that was modelled, the NE was closed and transport across NPCs was described as fluxes. RanGAP was cytoplasmic and RPs were only synthesized in the cytoplasm (see Figure ​Figure4).4). RPs could only cross the NE when bound to karyopherin (this disregards passive transport of small RPs that can happen but is less efficient then karyopherin-dependent transport). RanGTP dissociated host-RP-karyopherin complexes and stabilized mitochondrial-RP-karyopherin ones. Ribosome chimerism was greatly reduced compared to the open NE stages. At this stage, which is similar to the situation in modern eukaryotes, the nucleus is fully defined compositionally.

The ribosome chimerism model presents a detailed and gradual molecular scenario on how a compositionally distinct nuclear compartment could have evolved. It can account for several independent factors and their role in the evolution of compartmentalisation. These factors include the parameters of the RanGDP/GTP cycle, the geometry of the endomembrane system and the permeability of NPCs. I proposed ribosome chimerism as the likely selective factor driving these changes, although it was probably not the exclusive one.

The model agrees with the intron-spread model [17] in some important aspects but disagrees in others. Both models agree that the acquisition of the protomitochondrium and ensuing endosymbiotic gene transfer were the primary causes triggering the evolution of nuclear compartmentalisation. Whether the host that acquired the protomitochondrium was phagotrophic or not, although a major unresolved debate [4,24,42-45], is not strictly relevant for any of the models. The main difference is that the current model does not require the spread of spliceosomal introns before the origin of nuclear compartmentalisation. It is more consistent with the idea that introns started to spread selfishly only after the separation of transcription and translation [46] and that this spread was facilitated by the origin of intron-dependent nonsense-mediated mRNA decay [47].

Conclusion
Two important factors can be distinguished in the evolution of the nucleus, a neutral and a selective one. The fixation of slightly deleterious unidirectional transfer events of protomitochondrial genes to the host genome (gene transfer ratchet) was neutral and resulted in chimerism and reduced fitness. The second factor was the selective spread of compensatory advantageous mutations that reduced chimerism by segregating the mixed components. I defined key cellular and molecular stages and showed a gradual transition through them during which chimerism was progressively reduced. Most importantly, it was shown that it is possible to de-couple the origin of the NE and NPCs by invoking an open NE stage where the membranes served only as a diffusion barrier.

The idea that the nucleus evolved as a protective compartment, a solution to segregate ribosome factories in an endosymbiont-carrying cell does not require foresight from evolution. This is in contrast to the frequently encountered formulation that the nucleus evolved to allow a more sophisticated control of gene regulation. Eukaryotic gene regulation, RNA processing and other nuclear functions probably only evolved secondarily, as a means to adapt to the new situation resulting from the compartmentalisation of ribosome biogenesis.

Methods
Mitochondrial genomes were searched for the presence of RPs at the Organelle Genome Database (Gobase; http://gobase.bcm.umontreal.ca/). The RPs that do not occur in any mitochondrial genomes were visualized in the structure of the Thermus thermophilus 70S ribosome (PDB Codes: 2J02 and 2J03) using Pymol http://pymol.sourceforge.net/.

The simulations were run using Virtual Cell 4.4 at http://www.nrcam.uchc.edu/. The geometry size was 20 × 20 microns, the mesh size 300 × 300 points. The geometries had five volume domains (extracellular, cytoplasm, mitochondria, NE and chromatin) and four surface (membrane) domains (plasmamembrane, mitochondrial membrane, chromatin surface and NE membrane). No reactions happened in the extracellular, chromatin and NE domains. The mitochondrial membrane had a flux of mitochondrial-RP (0.5 * Mitochondrial_RP_Cytoplasm μM*μm2/sec) and the chromatin surface contained RCC1. The five geometries used differed only in the size of the NE membranes. Simulations were run until steady state (150 sec total time, 0.0010 sec time steps) using the finite volume method. The reactions and parameters used for the simulations are partly based on previous studies [7,48,49]. The RCC1-stimulated RanGDP/GTP exchange was modelled using Michaelis-Menten kinetics with Km = 0.5 μm and Vmax = 10.0*RCC1 molecules*μm-2 sec-1, instead of a four-step model as in [7,48,49]. RanGAP-stimulated GTP hydrolysis by Ran was modelled using Michaelis-Menten kinetics with Km = 0.7 μm and Vmax = 10.6*RanGAP μM sec-1. The binding of karyopherin to host-RP and mitochondrial-RP was described with mass action kinetics with Kf = 10 μM-1 sec-1 and Kr = 5 sec-1. The dissociation of host-RP-karyopherin complexes by RanGTP was described with mass action with a Kf = 3 μM-1 sec-1. The diffusion coefficients used were 22 μm2 sec-1 for RanGDP/GTP and RanGAP, 14 μm2 sec-1 for karyopherin, 20 μm2 sec-1 for RPs, and 13 μm2 sec-1 for karyopherin-RanGTP, karyopherin-host-RP and karyopherin-mitochondrial-RP complexes. The initial concentrations were 6 μM for Ran, 4 μM for karyopherin, 1 μM for RanGAP and 500 μM for RCC1 on the chromatin surface. Host-RP and mitochondrial-RP were synthesized with a reaction rate of 0.1 μM sec-1 and decayed following mass action with 0.1*RP mM sec-1.

The models are deposited into the public model database of Virtual Cell at http://www.nrcam.uchc.edu/.
