1) In this paper, Sabath et al. propose a convincingly simple explanation for a known genomic bias without recourse to positive selection. This is a significant achievement and a sobering one too given that it offers a minimal mechanism to a process where only complicated explanations were previously available. The coding regions of neighboring same-strand genes sometimes overlap, and for this overlap to consist of a different open reading frame a frame-shift of one (phase 1) or two (phase 2) base-pairs may be introduced. While it might be expected that both phases occur equally frequently, Sabath et al. confirm, using a large set of 167 genomes, the previously reported observation that long overlaps (=7 bp), phase 1's are favored 3 to 1 to phase 2's. This trend has been previously attributed to an unknown selective advantage or genomic location; however the authors here provide evidence for the preference of phase 1 codons from a simple base-pair compositional perspective.

2) The results can be essentially seen here as two themes: 1. Sabath et al. show that when examining coding regions, the codons in phase 1 contain more start codons than in the phase 2; and 2. that this trend holds across 167 genomes, although an impressive dependency with GC content is also revealed. For the former, the authors make the argument that the formation of a start codon in phase 2 is less probably since it requires rare phase 0 codons. This is a simple and brilliant explanation that appears well supported by the data. It is an explanation which does not require special selective biases and I fully support the authors claim that this is a neutral model which ought to be considered the null-hypothesis for the formation of overlapping genes.

3) As noted by the authors however, there seems to be another layer to this puzzle that remains unsolved. Throughout, Sabath et al. demonstrate the correlations across an axis of GC content, where genomes with a high GC content contains less fraction overlapping genes, of start codons in phase 1, and of stop codons in both phase 1, and 2. These strong correlation are the elephant in the room, especially contrasted with the lack of correlation of GC content with phase-2 long overlaps. It would be interesting to test whether frequent phase 0 codons lead to more popular codons in phase 1 than in phase 2. Since a gene with less frequent codons may also have low expression, purifying selection would tend to select against overlaps with unpopular codons. This analysis would generalize Sabath et al.'s analysis of the start/stop codons to the entire genetic code.

4) On a final note, I do not agree with the authors statements on the evolvability of overlap in the Discussion section. Sabath et al. write: "If evolvability is selected for, the expectation is for a positive correlation to exist between the frequency of an overlap phase and its evolvability. Evolvability considerations predict phase-1 and phase-2 overlaps to occur at equal frequencies [4]. Therefore, our data does not support a role for evolvability in the evolution of same-strand overlapping genes." It is not clear what exactly is meant by evolvability in this context, and why an equal frequency among the phases would support this. I would have expected the authors to conclude here that evolvability is an inappropriate issue when discussing overlapping genes since the evidence provided here point to a predominantly neutral process.