This manuscript presents a new method to compute Ka and Ks. The authors incorporated Tamura-Nei model into the Yang-Nielsen approach. This extension of the method would be of interest to experts in molecular evolution. I have a few comments and suggestions.

1) The manuscript would benefit from a much clearer justification of the method and discussion of its applicability. Tamura-Nei model was developed for the control region of the mitochondrial genome. Is the model with the uniform selective constraint (reflected by parameter omega) and raw mutation rates following gamma distribution realistic for nuclear protein coding genes? The dominant source of mutation rate variation in mammalian genes (used by the authors for testing the method) is likely to be the context-dependency, predominantly due to CpG contexts. Is the gamma distribution model capable of capturing this variation? Different rates for transitions between purines and pyrimidines imply strong strand bias. Is this a realistic assumption in nuclear genes and does it justify incorporation of additional parameters? Also, Tamura-Nei distance is known to have higher variance. How is this reflected in the performance of the method? I would suggest discussing these issues in the introduction and discussion sections.

2) I suggest that the presentation of the manuscript will be improved. For example, it is not clear that by gamma distribution of substitution rates (and, in general, by variable substitution rates) the authors mean gamma distribution of raw mutation rate rather than gamma distribution of omega.

3) Tests on real data: I would suggest eliminating the discussion of positive selection between human and chimpanzee. Small number of substitutions and relaxation of selection due to small effective population size may easily lead to the observed increase in genes with Ka/Ks > 1. Also, I do not see why human-chimpanzee comparison would be a good test of the method because there are essentially no multiple hits, so any method including simple counting should be reliable. A good test would be the analysis of known examples of proteins evolving under positive or negative selection and demonstration that the new method has higher power to detect selection (e.g. using fewer species or partial sequences). I understand, however, that this may be a subject of a separate study.

4) Is the software implementation of the method available?