This manuscript presents an analysis of HIV protease sequencing datasets. Comparing synonymous and non-synonymous sequence changes, the authors detected sites under putative positive selection possibly in response to drug treatment.

The manuscript is based on the earlier work by the same authors (J Virol. 2004 Apr;78(7):3722–32.) and introduces a new concept of conditional positive selection. The authors argue that selection in some sites is conditional on amino acid residue at a different site.

This is an interesting work and the manuscript has improved upon revision. The revised manuscript includes discussion of the existing literature on co-evolution of amino acid residues. However, I would still like to make a few comments, some of them being critical.

1) A few comments on the method

a) The authors make a series of simplifications including assumptions of star-like phylogeny and absence of multiple substitutions in individual codons. Therefore, the method assumes that all sequences are descendants of a single sequence and the estimation of Ka and Ks is done by simple counting. I agree with the authors that currently available methods are not applicable to the dataset of ~50,000 sequences. Thus, the authors have no other choice rather than to rely on simpler computationally efficient methods and making these assumptions is a necessity. The authors also point that the number of codons with multiple substitutions is not expected to be high. However, if the above assumptions are not valid (and it is not clear why the phylogeny is expected to be star-like), the results of the analysis have to be received with caution. Inference of positive selection can be erroneous. Analysis of statistical significance which relies on the binomial distribution and application of the Fisher exact test are not justified if these assumptions are not satisfied.

b) It is my understanding that frequencies of transition and transversion rates were estimated using both synonymous and non-synonymous changes. It may be better to use synonymous changes only.

c) Testing all pairs of codons creates an obvious multiple test problem. The manuscript would probably benefit from the discussion on how the rate of false-positive predictions is controlled given this multiple test problem.

2) It is of interest whether amino acid residue pairs which display conditional selection located close to each other in protein structure. The structural analysis can serve as a confirmation of the conclusions made by the authors. However, I agree with the authors's response that this should be a subject of a separate study.

3) Most importantly, I do not find the explanation of the observed "conditional selection" satisfactory. The authors argue that mutations with significant "conditional Ka/Ks values" are not directly involved in the drug resistance and play accessory role. The first mutation which is directly involved in the drug resistance is destabilizing (in other words, is expected to be deleterious in the absence of the drug treatment) and the second mutation is needed to compensate the destabilizing effect of the first mutation. Although, this is certainly a possibility, it is feasible to imagine many other scenarios. For example, is it possible that the first mutation enables the effect of the second mutation on the drug response, i.e. the first mutation is not destabilizing but the second mutation would not have an effect on drug resistance without the first mutation? Alternatively, is it possible that the first mutation is not destabilizing, whereas the second mutation would be destabilizing (and deleterious) in the absence of the first mutation (Dobzhansky-Muller incompatibility)? In this case also the second mutation may be directly involved in drug resistance. Importantly, the latter scenarios do not involve initial increase in frequency of a destabilizing variant.