Prediction of Posttranslational Modification of Proteins from Their Amino Acid Sequence
Abstract
If posttranslational modifications (PTMs) are chemical alterations of the protein primary structure during the protein’s life cycle as a result of an enzymatic reaction, then the motif in the substrate protein sequence that is recognized by the enzyme can serve as basis for predictor construction that recognizes PTM sites in database sequences. The recognition motif consists generally of two regions: first, a small, central segment that enters the catalytic cleft of the enzyme and that is specific for this type of PTM and, second, a sequence environment of about 10 or more residues with linker characteristics (a trend for small and polar residues with flexible backbone) on either side of the central part that are needed to provide accessibility of the central segment to the enzyme’s catalytic site. In this review, we consider predictors for cleavage of targeting signals, lipid PTMs, phosphorylation, and glycosylation.

Key words
posttranslational modifications GPI lipid anchor myristoylation prenylation farnesylation geranylgeranylation phosphorylation glycosylation peroxisomal localization protein function prediction

21.1 Introduction
A posttranslational modification (PTM) of a protein is the chemical alteration of its primary structure after translation. Generally, it is required that the considered type of covalent modification has to be a general feature of proteins from different families, not just that of a group of sequentially very similar ones. PTMs include both the formation of covalent cross-links of intra- or intermolecular (with a ligand/another protein) nature and the cleavage of covalent bonds including the breakage of a peptide bond and the removal of groups from single amino acid types. A typical protein appears to undergo several PTMs during its life time. Currently, more than 100 PTMs are known, the variety of PTMs is still growing and modifications that were considered obscure only a decade ago have become a mainstream target of research (1).

PTMs have a great impact on protein size, hydrophobicity, and its other physico-chemical properties. With PTMs, proteins can go beyond the limitations of chemical structure imposed by the set of 20 natural amino acid monomers and, therefore, may assume a much larger variety of complementary functional properties. PTMs can change, enhance, or block specific protein activities, or target a protein to another subcellular localization. Consequently, they allow the regulation of a protein’s function.

21.2 General Consideration for PTM Predictor Construction and Evaluation
21.2.1 PTMs as a Result of an Enzymatic Process
From the view point of protein function prediction (2), PTMs that originate from the action of posttranslationally modifying enzymes (in contrast to spontaneous PTMs, for example, as a result of long-term exposure to pathologically increased metabolite concentrations) are especially important. On the one hand, these PTMs are part of an information transfer in pathways and, thus, of special biological importance. On the other hand, these PTMs are introduced into and only into substrate proteins that carry a sequence motif that is recognized by the posttranslationally modifying enzyme. Regardless of the specific nature of the PTM, the general structure of the sequence motif region has common properties: Except for a minority of cases (PTM before folding or after unfolding, at sites on large loops, etc.), PTM sites are embedded in nonglobular regions without inherent structural preference (3, 4). As a trend, the residues in these regions are polar, small, and with flexible backbone. A small central motif region (typically, about 5 residues) that is specific for the PTM and that enters the catalytic cleft of the enzyme is surrounded by segments with linker characteristics (with more than 10 residues on either side) that make the PTM site mechanically accessible to the enzyme. It are the enzyme-generated PTMs that will be considered in the following text.

During the last decade, the number of high-throughput sequencing projects has been dramatically increased. Quite a few of whole genomes including the human one are available; protein sequence databases have reached an enormous size. At the same time, there are a huge number of functionally uncharacterized genes and proteins. Especially in the case of otherwise uncharacterized proteins, PTM prediction is a valuable tool for limiting the range of the protein’s possible function. For example, a target for glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) lipid anchoring, a complex lipid PTM has a defined subcellular localization (inner surface of the endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi, or the outer leaflet of the plasmalemma) and a limited range of functions (as extracellular enzyme, receptor, surface antigen, or transporter). The knowledge of a protein’s PTMs is not less important for proteins with some annotational features. This further characterization with a predicted PTM, possibly, can link the protein to another pathway or a new biological mechanism. From the biological point of view, it is important to know which posttranslationally modifying enzyme is the source of the PTM for a given substrate protein since this relationship carries a pathway information. To conclude, the computer-aided prediction of the possibility of a protein’s posttranslational modification from amino acid sequence is an important task that is critical for the biological interpretation of proteome data.

21.2.2 General Considerations for PTM Predictors
Whereas PTM prediction from sequence was a relatively obscure area of research 10 years ago, a superficial study of literature databases reveals a flood of papers in recent years. Unfortunately, many of these predictors have not been properly validated and the significance of new predictions beyond the range of what is solidly known from experiments cannot be reasonably assessed. Indeed, it is insufficient to collect some type of learning set, apply an automatic learning procedure, and throw the “predictor” on the market. This will not lead to biologically meaningful new predictions. What are the problems in the area of PTM predictor construction? Below, we will consider the most important aspects relevant for the evaluation of prediction tools (1, 3, 4).

The most basic issue is motif size. Many prediction efforts process only the putative central part of the recognition motif in their score function, maybe, with inclusion of a couple of surrounding residues. With a motif length of about a handful of residues, the motif description is not very discriminative and false-positive predictions (with more incorrect than correct predictions) become the major problem that devalues the significance of the prediction in the eyes of experimentalists. The traditional approach of characterizing short motifs with PROSITE-like notations (5, 6, 7) emphasizes positional information isolatedly; it ignores inter-positional correlations and is not really applicable for motif regions that are rather characterized by physical property conservation of amino acid side chains (in contrast to amino acid type conservation) (4). Consideration of the requirement of motif embedding in a linker-type region (3, 8) enlarges the total motif length to something like 25–30 residues and dramatically adds discriminative power to the scoring function.

The second critical issue is the question of proper biological context. It is important to build enzyme-specific scoring function for predictors. Thus, the learning set should include only substrates that are collected from one posttranslationally modifying enzyme or from a class of enzymes that essentially recognize the same motif in substrate proteins. For example, there is no biological sense for an acetylation predictor (9) that recognizes an “average” motif (“averaged” over several enzymes with possibly overlapping, yet vastly nonidentical specificity) since there is no enzyme that recognizes this “average” motif. The high rate of false predictions by enzyme-non-specific tools render them not useful for advice in experimental strategy planning and for proteome-wide scans.

Yet, it must be noticed that, very often, the link between the information on the type of PTM in a substrate protein and the information about the enzyme gets lost. For example, there are a number of mass-spectrometric data sets on phosphorylated proteins available, but the nature of the kinases behind these phosphorylation sites remains generally unknown. With this background, databases such as Phospho.ELM (10) with detailed information on substrates of explicitly named kinases are the more valuable. One might think that only predictors following the recognition motif concept enter the recent scientific literature; surprisingly, the nonbiological concept of relating PTMs (and subcellular localization) with overall amino acid composition is still not dead [see for example (11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17)]. There is no biological mechanism known that recognizes total amino acid composition; yet, the attachment of a nonglobular segment to the target protein carrying the motif for a PTM executing enzyme or a translocation receptor add the respective property (capability for PTM or translocation) to the protein, essentially without changing the amino acid composition.

The third key question in predictor development is the quality of underlying data – the amount and redundancy of example substrate protein sequences (or information about model peptides) and the level of authenticity. The UniProt (Swiss-Prot/TrEMBL) database is one of the best curated protein sequence databases. It strives to provide a high level of annotation, a minimal level of redundancy, and high level of integration with other databases (http://ca.expasy.org/sprot). Unfortunately, many PTMs are annotated based on sequence similarity to known substrates or other more obscure considerations but not on first-hand experimental evidence. Such assumptions raise the level of noise in the dataset. To emphasize, homologues do not need to have the same type of PTM. For example, human nyctalopin is GPI lipid anchored and the mouse orthologue is membrane bound with a transmembrane helix, although there is considerable sequence identity among the two homologues (18).

Finally from the mathematical point of view, there is a large variety of formal methods to describe a regression between sequence features of a recognition motif and the PTM outcome. The application of automated learning procedures such as neural networks (NN) or support vector machines (SVM) appears straightforward; yet, the large amount of parameters involved in the scoring function renders them not optimal for the task when learning sets are small and when they might contain false examples.

A technically cheaper approach that tries to understand sequence determinants that affect productive binding of the substrate protein segment with the binding site of the modifying enzyme generates considerably fewer parameters for physical property terms that have been proven very successful in rejecting improper sequence queries (1, 4, 19, 20). Interestingly, small subsets of apparently wrong examples in the learning set become eye-catching as a result of their discordance with the binding site requirements. For example, in the case of the development of MyrPS/NMT (20, 21), a prediction tool for N-terminal N-myristoylation, this approach revealed a striking difference with regard to six N-terminally overly hydrophobic proteins that were annotated as NMT substrates in the sequence database and, thus entered the learning set: the physical binding model distinguishes them as clearly different from the learning set and possibly unsuitable targets (20, 21), whereas a neural network approach does not see this difference (22) and treats all learning set examples equally reliable.

21.2.3 General Issues with Prediction Rate Accuracy
A good sequence-based predictor should be able to clarify two questions:
1.
Is the query protein a potential target for the PTM considered? Both the positive and negative answers need to be reliable and risk of a false positive or false negative prediction should be quantified probabilistically.

 
2.
If the sequence is a potential target for the PTM, what are the likely sequence positions in the query protein that may harbor the modification?

 
The ideal predictor is characterized by a high sensitivity and a very low false-positive prediction rate. Any real predictor is always a compromise between these two oppositional requests. On the one hand, it is relatively easy to create a program which predicts a selected training (learning) set with nearly 100% by choosing not very stringent parameters. But such a parameter set will result in a giant rate of false positive predictions. On the other hand, very stringent parameters warrant a low false-positive prediction rate but decrease the sensitivity (true-positive prediction rate) of the program. In a practical context of an experimental laboratory and for proteome scans, the issue of a low false-positive prediction rates might even become more important for the predictor than the recognition of 100% of the known cases.

Unfortunately, many of the existing predictors do not find the compromise with false-positive prediction rates in the race for full coverage of known sequence examples. The user of a prediction program is encouraged to cast a critical eye over the prediction algorithm and the prediction results:
(1)
On the collection of the training/learning set(s): Did the authors analyze their training set(s) carefully? What is the quality of the data? Are they properly experimentally verified? Are the descriptions of the sequence entries in agreement with recent literature? Are there taxonomic differences and is the specificity of orthologues of the posttranslationally modifying enzymes unchanged? Are their mutation analysis data available? How specific is the training set; e.g., a PTM can be introduced by different enzymes or different enzyme complexes with different requirements for substrate specificity. Is the training set specific for only one type of PTM pathway?

 
(2)
What are the parameters of the prediction function? How many parameters does the prediction function include and how much learning data is backing them? Are there any biological mechanisms that can be used to explain the role of the parameters in the prediction model?

 
(3)
Critical analysis of the prediction results: It is a good idea to test some experimentally verified examples with the predictor (as well as sequentially similar antiexamples, e.g., from mutations that abolish the capability for the PTM) and to analyze the quality of prediction. An important question is whether the prediction result is in agreement with the existing knowledge about the analyzed protein(s) and the mechanism of the respective PTM; e.g., only a restricted number of amino acids can serve as a cleavage and/or attachment site.

 
In the following text, we try summarize the state of the art of prediction of various PTMs from sequence. Emphasis is given to prediction tools that perform reliably, especially with low false-positive rates that have also been proven useful in finding new biological insight. A good predictor should have coverage of well-verified examples of 90% or better and, at the same time, generate false-positive prediction with a rate of, maximally, a few percent. Occasionally, we will turn to comparative analysis of predictors for the same PTM and highlight some of the points discussed above that distinguish good predictors from not so recommendable tools.

21.3 Predictors for Specific PTMS
21.3.1 Recognition of Targeting Signals with and Without Proteolytic Cleavage Sites
A number of N-terminal targeting signals, most notably the N-terminal signal peptide coding for extracellular export, are cleaved after recognition by the respective enzyme complex during the translocation process. In these cases, signal recognition occurs cotranslationally at the unfolded protein; thus, the concept of embedding in linker-type segments is not applicable here. The state of the art is represented by SignalP (23), Phobius (24), and SPOCTOPUS for the signal peptide and TargetP (25) for the organelle-specific predictors.

Interestingly, the concept of a central motif surrounded by linkers does work also for translocation signals that are recognized by receptor proteins posttranslationally such as the peroxisomal translocation signal 1 (PTS1) (26, 27).

The respective WWW servers can be found at the following sites:

21.3.2 Lipid PTMs
The number of enzymes responsible for several lipid PTMs (GPI lipid, farnesyl, geranylgeranyl, and myristoyl anchors) among eukaryotes is relatively small and, typically, there is just one enzyme species for a given modification. Thus, all known targets can be assigned to this enzyme, a considerable shortcut in the assessment of the available data on lipid modified proteins. Quite reliable prediction tools are available for GPI lipid anchoring (19, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32), myristoyl (20, 21, 33, 34, 35) and prenyl anchors (36, 37, 38, 39).

The range of palmitoyltransferases is less well understood and the assignment of protein substrates to the various enzymatic entities is only at the beginning. At best, heuristic rules are reasonably applied to palmitoylation sites prediction without great reliability (40).

The respective WWW servers can be found at the following sites:

The GPI lipid anchor prediction algorithm is the first out of a series of PTM prediction efforts based on the simplified binding site model (3, 28, 32). The animal protein big-PI predictor (19) and its taxonomic derivatives for fungi (32) and plants (31) are a good starting point to evaluate alternative and more recent predictor developments in the light of the requirements described in the sections above.

The aim of the programs is to predict suitable substrate protein candidates for glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchoring and, in the case of a hit, to predict the attachment site of the anchor. GPI lipid anchoring is a PTM that tethers eukaryotic proteins and their viruses to the extracellular leaflet of the cell membrane. The biosynthesis of GPI anchored proteins is a very complex, multilevel process that takes place in the endoplasmatic reticulum (ER) (3, 41). A transamidase complex cleaves a C-terminal propeptide from the substrate protein and attaches a pre-synthesized GPI moiety to the cleavage site. The cleavage and attachment site is called ω-site. Typically, the whole construct is exported to the extracellular side of the cell membrane, but it is not excluded that some of the GPI anchored proteins remain in the ER or other compartments of the vesicular system during their whole lifecycle.

The GPI-SOM predictor (42) relies on automatic learning from a complex set of sequences annotated as transamidase substrates. This learning set has dramatic deficiencies:

(i) The authors claim that the positive training and evaluation sets consist of proteins that had been experimentally shown to be GPI anchored. These include 110 proteins regardless of taxa from the whole eukaryote kingdom selected via Entrez from Genbank, supplemented with a set of 248 GPI proteins from Arabidopsis thaliana (43). Unfortunately, the data are of different quality with respect to the experimental verification. It should be noted that it is not sufficient to know the fact of GPI anchoring of a protein (typically it is only verified by a phospholipase C release test), but it is also important to know the exact ω-cleavage site. At least for the Borner A. thaliana set, this is not the case. The authors of GPI-SOM ignore the fact that there are taxonomic differences in the C-terminal GPI sequence motif (44) that are distinguished by the transamidase complexes of various taxa. (ii) There is a large body of data available from GPI motif mutation analyses spread over the literature and the majority of which has been compiled in two surveys for metazoa (19) and fungi (32). These data contain both an experimentally verified positive collection and a verified negative sequence set, both with more than 100 cases. The mutations are an especially demanding test for the GPI lipid anchor predictor since a single point mutation can abolish the capability for GPI lipid anchoring completely.

It was already mentioned that automated learning procedures require learning sets of especially high quality since they are unable to recognize errors in the sequence collections. The final GPI-SOM prediction program was implemented as a Kohonen SOM (neural network of the Kohonen type, also termed self-organizing map) with an input layer of 44 neurons (thus, introducing hundreds of adjustable parameters). Neuronal networks are a very common technique for classifying data sets but, with noise in the learning set, the predictor will generate systematic errors at the output layer. Due to their technical approach, the authors could not make use of any mechanistic insights that govern the recognition process of substrates by the transamidase. The following examples highlight the problems:
(1)
Human complement decay-accelerating factor (CD55 or DAF, accession number P08174) is a protein that was tested to be GPI anchored even by different research groups. It was used for mutational studies (44, 45), the ω-site is well known. GPI-SOM predictor is not able to classify this protein as a GPI lipid modified protein and does not find even a trend among the various mutations.

 
(2)
If one tests the 248 A. thaliana sequences (43), which are a part of the positive training set for GPI-SOM, then 245 out of the 248 sequences are listed as GPI-SOM positive predictions (240 as GPI-anchored proteins in combination with SignalP prediction). But a closer analysis of the prediction results reveals that most of the predicted ω-cleavage sites are wrong. Only a limited set of amino acid residues (Ala, Cys, Asp, Gly, Asn, and Ser) is known to be capable to serve as an ω-site (43, 45, 46). In the case of the predicted 245 GPI candidates, only 97 (39.6%) predicted cleavage sites are compatible with this rule. This means that the majority (at least 60.4%) of the ω-sites is wrongly predicted by GPI-SOM. Interestingly, GPI-SOM favors proline at the ω-site position (37 proteins), followed by serine (35) and glycine (25). According to mutational studies [see mutation database (19)], proline is absolutely disfavored from occupying the ω-site position. Thus, GPI-SOM predictions are in conflict with basic enzymology of the process considered.

 
(3)
The GPI-SOM authors predict almost all of the proteins of a SWISS-PROT data set to be GPI anchored (Table 2-e in their paper). What they did not discuss is that this data set contains quite a number of doubtfully annotated protein sequences [Table I in Ref. (28)] and one might rightfully expect that these proteins will not carry a GPI lipid anchor.

 
(4)
The authors of GPI-SOM found that, among transmembrane proteins with an N-terminal signal leader peptide plus a hydrophobic C-terminus – the proteins most closely resembling GPI-anchored ones – the false-positive prediction rate is around 30%, a rate that disqualifies the tool for experimental planning.

 
The authors of GPI-SOM combine their own prediction module with the SignalP (47) program (surprisingly, without acknowledgment of the SignalP authors). Using the SignalP program, the GPI-SOM authors reduce their prediction rate in S. cerevisiae from 438 positives (out of 5,864 proteins) to only 121 positives. The remaining 307 hits are ruled out as positives with the argument that a protein cannot be GPI anchored without having an N-terminal signal leader peptide. In the general context, this conclusion is very problematic. First, alternative export mechanisms to the ER appear to exist and example proteins exported via the alternative pathway with a GPI lipid anchor are known (48). Second, SignalP is a prediction program having its own error rates. Third, the quality of the sequence data in large sequence sets, especially in high-throughput sequence data, is limited. It is possible that the N-termini and/or C-termini of sequences are missing (49). To put in a nutshell, the GPI-SOM predictor is not a useful tool for analyzing large-scale data because the false-positive prediction rate is in an unacceptable range. The tool can also not be used for the prediction of ω-sites because it is incapable to do so.

There is another recently published GPI predictor called FragAnchor (50). It is based on the tandem use of a neuronal network and a hidden Markov model. We have tested both our mutation set containing proteins and mutated proteins for which GPI anchoring has been experimentally shown [positive mutation set – 188 sequences (19)] and a respective negative mutation set containing protein mutations, which were shown to be not compatible with GPI anchoring [108 sequences (19)] with the FragAnchor program. The prediction of the positive mutation set appears very reasonable, only 10 sequences (5.3%) are not predicted as true candidates for GPI lipid modification. But the prediction of the negative mutation set seems to be problematic. Only 22 out of 108 sequences (20.4%) were predicted as not GPI anchored; thus, the false-positive prediction rate is in the order of 80%. Indeed, it is relatively easy to create a predictor with high sensitivity, but the real challenging task is to keep the rate of false-positive predictions in a low range.

The most recent GPI-anchor predictor, PredGPI (51), is an especially negative example for using machine learning methods (in this case, with SVM) due to its very poor training set. PredGPI is trained on a dataset of only 26 protein sequences just ignoring the plenty of data that is available these days. But the paper is also remarkable in other respects. If one enters the small learning set of 26 sequences into the PredGPI Web server interface (http://gpcr2.biocomp.unibo.it/predgpi), one will get a really surprising result that greatly differs from what the authors show in Table 3 in their paper. According to that table, PredGPI predicts all of the 26 proteins as GPI anchored. Unfortunately, the Web server comes up with a different result: seven of the proteins are predicted as GPI candidates with high probability, 13 proteins are predicted as probable GPI anchored proteins, one protein is indicated as suitable for GPI anchoring with low probability but five proteins are predicted as not GPI anchored at all.

21.3.3 Phosphorylation Prediction Tools
Protein phosphorylation is one of the most common and one of the most studied posttranslational modifications. In the case of eukaryotic proteins, kinases, the enzymes that catalyze protein phosphorylation, transfer a phosphate (PO4) group from adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to serine, threonine, or tyrosine amino acids, thereby generating adenosine diphosphate (ADP). In addition, phosphorylation of basic amino acids (histidine, arginine, lysine) is possible in prokaryotic proteins. Today, more than 500 protein kinases have been identified in the human genome, and they modify at least one-third of all human protein species (52).

Reversible phosphorylation is a ubiquitous regulatory mechanism that controls a large variety of biological processes such as cell growth and differentiation, proliferation, and apoptosis. Typically, protein kinases, phosphatases (dephosphorylation enzymes), and their substrates are organized in very complex regulatory networks. Proteins can work as a trigger or a switch in such a system depending on their phosphorylation status.

Over the past few years, phosphoproteomic mass spectrometry (MS) has replaced the traditional methods for measuring protein phosphorylation (mutational analysis, Edman degradation chemistry on phosphopeptides). Thousands of phosporylation sites have been identified for thousands of proteins. But in most cases, the information which kinase is responsible for the phosphorylation of a certain amino acid in a certain protein is missing. Of course, this fact impedes the development of powerful predictors for protein phosphorylation sites. There are several databases such as Phospho.ELM (10), PhosphoSitePlus (www.phosphosite.org), and NetworKIN (53) trying to reduce the gap between the number of experimentally identified phosphorylation sites and the number of phosphorylation sites for which the modifying kinase is known.

Unfortunately, most of the phosphorylation predictors described in the literature are not created for substrates of a specific kinase but for quite a number of unrelated protein substrates (or, in the worst case, for all possible Ser-, Thr- or Tyr-kinases). Since the kinases have largely differing substrate specificities, naturally, these predictors struggle with the problem of predicting a huge number of potential phosphorylation sites (many of them being false positives). This leads to the situation that most of these predicted sites are misclassified. Therefore, these prediction tools cannot be recommended for planning of experiments or proteome-wide in silico scans. It is a fundamental quality feature of a predictor to aim at predicting substrates for specific kinases or a class of kinases with essentially identical substrate specificity.

There are quite a number of different phosphorylation site predictors available and the list below is far from complete; yet, only a few can be recommended for usage:

The overarching problem in phosphorylation site prediction is the false-positive rate and only the more recent developments approach this problem seriously. Exact measurement of the selectivity is not an easy issue either (see (1, 4, 54, 63)for discussion).

NetPhos (57) was one of the first approaches which outperformed simple PROSITE-like (6) searches, but this is a neural network predictor for substrates of any kinase, a situation contradicting the known biological mechanisms of protein substrate selection. NetPhosK (56) is a kinase-specific extension to the general NetPhos method. Scansite 2.0 (62) uses position-specific scoring matrixes (PSSM) to predict phosphorylation motifs for 62 different kinases. In this site model, only the central motif that directly interacts with the active site of the kinase is considered for discrimination from nonsites; it appears that this is a major reason for the high false-positive rate. Using support vector machines (SVMs), PredPhospho (59) and KinasePhos2.0 (55), attempts to predict phosphorylation sites and the type of kinase that acts at each site.

Typically, prediction algorithms which are based on PROSITE-like patterns generate a huge amount of false-positive predictions. The same is true for profile searches with short motifs. In the case of GPS2.0 (60), the authors even increase the possibility of a false-positive prediction by reducing the strength of the profile they search with (to achieve higher coverage of known examples). The final score for a query (phosphorylation) site is calculated as an average value of substitution scores which are obtained from the comparison of the query motif to all known phosphorylation sites in the training set. The substitution scores rely on a slightly modified BLOSUM62 substitution matrix which contains negative values for disfavored substitutions, e.g., replacing alanine with arginine is evaluated by -2, and positive (or zero) values for more advantageous substitutions, e.g. replacing alanine with serine is scored with +1. Surprisingly, the authors of GPS2.0 simplify the substitution scores in that way that they ignore negative matrix values (just adding zero instead) and, therefore, do not penalize the occurrence of disfavored amino acid types in the query motif at all.

pkaPS (54) is an algorithm for the prediction of protein kinase A (PKA) phosphorylation sites. The pkaPS authors studied the PKA recognition motif in great detail and created a capable prediction module (sensitivity ∼ 96% at a specificity ∼94%) based on a simplified substrate protein-binding model. Comparison of the prediction performances of pkaPS to the previously mentioned phosphorylation site predictors (PKA prediction only) shows that pkaPS is the most powerful standalone predictor at present (54). DIPHOS (8) is a predictor that is conceptionally most closely related to pkaPS. The authors of the predictor programs try to improve the discrimination between phosphorylation and nonphosphorylation sites by using disorder information (sequence complexity, hydrophobicity, net charge) in addition to position-specific amino acid frequencies. The authors rely on the hypothesis that protein phosphorylation predominantly occurs within intrinsically disordered protein regions.

21.3.4 Glycosylation
Many proteins in eukaryotic cells are glycoproteins. Glycosylation is an enzymatic process that covalently links oligosaccharide chains to certain amino acids. In contrast, glycation is a nonenzymatic reaction that adds sugar molecules, such as glucose or fructose, to lysine residues (56). Glycosylation is known to be important for a large variety of functions such as protein folding and stability, manipulation of a protein’s cellular localization, and trafficking as well as cell–cell interactions.

There are four main categories of glycosylation: (i) N-linked glycosylation (addition of the sugars to the amino group (NH2) of an asparagine of secreted or membrane-bound proteins), (ii) O-linked glycosylation (addition of the sugar to the hydroxyl group (OH) of a serine or a threonine), (iii) C-mannosylation (addition of a mannose sugar to tryptophan), and (iv) GPI anchors (see lipid anchor modifications) (56).

The number of glycosyltransferases is huge; many of them are not explored and, compared with the situation of phosphorylation substrates, the relationship between the specific glycosyltransferases and their substrates is generally even less studied than for the kinases. As a result, glycosylation prediction remains in a very unsatisfactory state and the computerized protein sequence-based predictors have low predictive power. Among the published literature and the WWW-available sites, the following servers belong to the more reasonable ones:

Traditionally, N-glycosylation is understood as a process of adding a glycan structure to the substrate protein in the endoplasmic reticulum. The NetNglyc server predicts N-glycosylation sites in human proteins using artificial neural networks that examine the sequence context of Asn-Xaa-Ser/Thr motifs (64).

O-glycosylation is more diverse from the viewpoint of subcellular localizations of targets. They can be secreted or become transmembrane proteins, also at Golgi vesicle membranes. In addition, O-glycosylation has been shown to occur in the nucleus and cytoplasm of cells (56). NetOGlyc(65) produces neural network predictions of mucin-type GalNAc O-glycosylation sites in mammalian proteins. It is a combination of predictions from the best overall network and the best isolated (single) site network. The best overall network relies on amino acid composition, averaged surface accessibility predictions together with substitution matrix profile encoding of the protein sequence. Interestingly, the authors find that a glycosylated serine or threonine is less likely to be precisely conserved than a nonglycosylated one. Unfortunately, the predictive power is not great. The authors say that the addition of GalNAc to serine and threonine is mediated by at least 14 different UDP-GalNAc:polypeptide N-acetyl-galactosaminyltransferase (71) with, most likely, differing specificity. Another WWW server for the same mucin-type glycosylation is OGPET (see above for WWW URL) with a simple pattern-matching procedure.

The authors of CKSSAP_OGlySite (66) suggest that the usage of the composition of k-spaced amino acid pairs evaluated with an SVM reaches prediction rates that are better than those of OGlyc (67), another SVM-based tool that evaluates the presence of 188 physical properties in the motif region; yet, the problem of glycosyltransferase preference for certain types of protein substrates remains untouched in both papers. When we submitted EGFR_HUMAN (P00533, annotated as N-linked glycoprotein), the tool NetOGlyc does not predict any sites (apparently the correct prediction), OGPET generates one prediction (serine 921), CKSAAP delivers even 11 sites (residues 1025, 1026, 1028, 1032, 1036, 1037, 1039, 1041, 1045, 1141, 1145), and Oglyc finds 6 sites (threonine 273, serines 921, 924, 1036, and 1042, threonine 1046). It should be noted that OGlyc reports the results shifted by one residue, apparently a small bug. CSKAAP requires the user to wait (in our case, a day) to receive an E-mail for the prediction results.

DictyOGlyc (68) is a specialized predictor for O-α-GlcNAc sites in Dictostelium discoideum-based neuronal networks that explore the immediate sequence context and the predicted surface accessibility of potential sites. Unfortunately, there are only 39 sequences in the learning set.

The YinOYang neuronal network produces predictions for O-βGlcNAc attachment sites in eukaryotic protein sequences. This tool should be applied in parallel with NetPhos. The idea of “Ying-Yang”-sites suggests that glycosylation and phosphorylation of the same serine or threonine hydroxyl group are possible and it should be predicted by both methods.

C2-mannosylation of tryptophane is a recently discovered new form of glycosylation of proteins (72) that is introduced into the unfolded protein, apparently, during import into the endoplasmic reticulum. There are almost 70 experimentally verified examples with the WxxW (or the WxxC) motif. The NetCGlyc (69) neuronal network explores an 21-residue sequence window as input window with the potentially modified tryptophane at the center. The NetGlycate (70) neuronal network attempts to find sites for nonenzymatic glycation sites.

21.4 Conclusions
The experience shows that the prediction tools function best for those PTMs, for which the biology is best understood and where the prediction algorithm can mimic the recognition of the substrate by the modifying enzyme. In the development of several lipid anchor prediction tools [big-PI (19, 31, 32), MyrPS (20), PrePS (36)], such considerations had been central and, not surprisingly, the predictions have become similarly reliable as the collection of sequence families within the homology concept. Other tools that can be recommended for general use are SIGNALP (23) and, with somewhat more reservations, pkaPS (54). The PeroPS (26, 27) tool for the recognition of the PTS1 translocation signal is constructed following similar principles and appears also safe for usage.

All other PTM prediction tools have considerable problems with false-positive predictions and are problematic for the application in the context of uncharacterized sequence studies. The enormous growth of the number of bioinformatics teams and researchers and the pressure on them to publish has led to a proliferation of journals, inflation of the number of published articles and a dramatic, collective decline of impact factors for specialized bioinformatics journals. Over the field as a whole, the standard of prediction tool development manuscripts has not improved over the last decade neither with respect to biological considerations nor technical perfection; even standards that were generally accepted such as justification of the amount of parameters by the amount of data, proper cross-validation tests, or at least the attempt of collecting all available experimental data for learning of the scoring function’s parameters are frequently not complied with.

At the end, we wish to highlight the problem between the occurrences of sequence regions in a substrate protein that are recognized by the prediction tools as fit for receiving a specific PTM and the observation of this PTM in vivo for the same protein. In the first situation, the focus is whether the protein can be the target of a productive interaction with the modifying enzyme and this question can, for example, be studied in an in vitro assay. It is another question whether the two reaction partners ever come together in vivo (and this might depend on physiological or pathological conditions, be influenced by mutations, etc.). Once this conception is agreed upon, one might predict the occurrence of sites that are fully functional for a PTM (or a translocation signal); yet, they remain silent in normal physiology. Indeed, such sites do exist as was shown in an experimental test (63).

