Schizophrenia is a disease with unknown aetiology despite numerous efforts to find its cause for over more than a century. In this study Gumerov and Hegyi approach the subject from the point of view of microRNAs. They combine microRNA target data with a methylation study conducted in schizophrenic brains, a protein-protein interaction database, STRING, and various gene sets such as Genecards and Malacards, mostly derived from text mining of the literature. The authors find that the mostly hypermethylated gene in the methylation study, GABBR1 is also the target of the top two microRNAs with the highest number of targets in their set. Combining this with protein-protein interaction data they find that most proteins form a network of interactions with two hubs where one of the hubs is again GABBR1 while the other hub is AKT1, protein kinase B, an important protein in signal transduction. From this they conclude that GABBR1 might play a causative role in schizophrenia. I think the work is original and describes observations that can be of importance in understanding schizophrenia.
I have a few notes that I ask the authors to address in the final published version:

1. If the genes in question form a network by being targeted by shared microRNAs as they suggest, should not these microRNAs also be hyper- or hypomethylated in the methylation study they analyze in this study? There is no mentioning of this in the manuscript.
2. How do the transcription factors with binding sites in the cis regions of the genes in the network in Fig.​Fig.3relate3relate to the shared microRNAs? Aren’t they more important in the regulation of the interacting genes than the microRNAs they focus on? (Also, there is no data on promoter transcription factor binding sites, only on cis regulatory elements). This gives an incomplete picture.
3. There seems to be an inconsistency regarding the hyper- and hypomethylation of the genes that interact with each other. E.g. the authors claim that AKT1 is downregulated in schizophrenics whereas AKT1 seems to be only mildly hypermethylated based on its shade of grey in Fig.​Fig.33.)

4. It would be interesting to see whether in the full available interaction network of the proteins in question (i.e. not only those regulated by the selected miRNAs and/or indicated in schizophrenia) GABBR1 and AKT1 still stand out with some properties.
Minor issues: − When using data from mirbase.org, were the tissue origins of the miRNAs considered? –
In Fig.​Fig.4,4, might the existence of the correlation be better visualized on a logarithmic scale? –
In the abstract the authors mention a scale-free network. I would refrain from this notation even if the power-law distribution for miRNA targets is valid because the nodes in the full network are not equivalent (miRNAs and regulated proteins).