Hunting for Treasure Chests in Microbial Defense Islands

Microbes exist in a constant struggle with viruses and have evolved multiple defense mechanisms. Some of these, such as restriction endonucleases and CRISPR-Cas, have revolutionized genome editing methodology. A systematic strategy combining computation and experiment led to discovery of ten new defense systems that remain to be characterized mechanistically.

All cellular organisms are subject to constant onslaught from genetic parasites including transposons, plasmids, and viruses. The perennial host-parasite arms race drives the evolution of diverse and versatile defense and anti-defense systems including resistance mechanisms as well as innate and adaptive immunity. Enormous variability of defense mechanisms is characteristic of even the simplest life forms, bacteria and archaea. The defense systems display fascinating molecular and biological properties, but what attracts the strongest attention to them is their utility as genome engineering tools. Indeed, restriction endonucleases (REs), which are key components of microbial innate immunity, enabled the development of the first generation of such tools in the 1970s (Pingoud et al., 2016), whereas the CRISPR-Cas systems, the microbial adaptive immunity machinery, became the second generation in the 2010s (Komor et al., 2017). Microbial defense systems are useful in genome engineering because of their ability to recognize and cleave parasite genomes or transcripts at specific, and in some cases like CRISPR-Cas, effectively unique sites, and such recognition is the hardest part of any genome editing and engineering protocol. Hence the huge interest in the discovery of new defense systems in microbes. The early mining of microbial genomes for versatile REs and the recent searches for new CRISPR variants have shown just how productive such efforts can be, and recently, novel defense systems with distinct, not yet well-characterized mechanisms have been discovered including prokaryotic Argonautes (Swarts et al., 2014), BREX (Goldfarb et al., 2015), and DISARM (Ofir et al., 2018).

In a recent Science paper (Doron et al., 2018), Shany Doron and colleagues describe their efforts on systematic discovery of novel defense mechanisms by querying microbial genomes. Their search strategy takes advantage of the wide spread of the so-called defense islands in the genomes of bacteria and archaea (Makarova et al., 2011). The defense islands are genomic regions that contain genes involved in different defense processes. It remains unclear whether there is a specific selective advantage in such clustering of defense genes, such as functional cooperation between different types of defense systems, or if instead the islands are “genomic junkyards” in which the defense genes that are frequently acquired via horizontal gene transfer accumulate because insertion in these regions is unlikely to be deleterious. Regardless, the islands are the right places to look for novel defense systems. This is what Doron et al. did by constructing a simple computational pipeline to search for clusters of unknown genes adjacent to known defense operons (Figure 1). This straightforward strategy proved remarkably fruitful. The candidate new defense systems detected using this pipeline were fed into another, more challenging experimental validation pipeline that involved cloning of the corresponding pieces of DNA into one of the two model bacteria, Escherichia coli or Bacillus subtilis, and testing for the resistance to a panel of corresponding phages (Figure 1). In several cases, Doron and colleagues did not stop there but performed additional site-specific mutagenesis of selected components of the discovered systems, to test their hypotheses about functional mechanisms.

Using this composite, computation-to-experiment pipeline, Doron and colleagues tested 28 candidate defense systems and demonstrated anti-phage activity for nine and anti-plasmid activity for a tenth system. The ten novel defense systems were, in a fanciful, yet delightful manner, named after protective deities from different world religions (Figure 1). As one could expect, all the new defense systems are comparatively rare in the microbial world; that is, much less common than REs or CRISPR-Cas, but nevertheless, each is represented in a diverse array of bacteria and/or archaea. Also not surprisingly, the protein components of these systems contain the typical domains involved in defense functions, namely, diverse nucleases and helicases. However, unusual features crop up as well; in particular, those that imply a connection between defense and different forms of signal transduction in microbes and/or membrane association of the defense machinery. Thus, Zorya encompasses two membrane proteins that are predicted to encode a proton channel that could depolarize the membrane of a phage-infected cell, causing cell death. This could be a distinct variety of an abortive infection mechanism and a notable case of coupling between defense and altruistic cellular suicide. Thoeris is especially remarkable as it encompasses proteins containing multiple variants of the TIR (Toll-interleukin receptor) domain. TIR is a signal transduction domain that cleaves NAD+ and is a key component of innate immunity and programmed cell death systems in eukaryotes (Panneerselvam and Ding, 2015). These findings start to establish the long-sought connection between prokaryotic and eukaryotic defense and programmed cell death mechanisms (Aravind et al., 2012). Wadjet, the anti-plasmid system, consists of proteins that appear to be distantly related to condensins, which are involved in plasmid segregation and could function by abrogating this process in a completely new and unexpected defense strategy.

The amount of novelty discovered in this single study is staggering. These results not only reveal the suspected but so far uncharacterized diversity of microbial anti-parasite defenses, but also show the virtually unlimited—given that the vast majority of the microbial diversity on our planet remains untapped—potential of the combination of biology-driven computation and computation-driven experiments. The new defense systems discovered by Doron and colleagues come from genomic islands that also encompass known defense genes. Conceivably, an even vaster repertoire of mechanisms that are involved in defense and, more broadly, in various forms of biological conflict can be uncovered by mining the true genomic “dark matter”; that is, islands that consist solely of uncharacterized genes. Last but not least, there is no reason to believe that the potential for developing new tools for genome engineering and molecular biology in general is limited to REs and CRISPR (Kim, 2018). The protective deities described by Doron and colleagues as well as new ones that remain to be discovered might eventually come to the defense of our health.
