Viruses in the 21st Century: From the Curiosity-Driven Discovery of Giant Viruses to New Concepts and Definition of Life 

Abstract
The curiosity-driven discovery of giant DNA viruses infecting amoebas has triggered an intense debate about the origin, nature, and definition of viruses. This discovery was delayed by the current paradigm confusing viruses with small virions. Several new definitions and concepts have been proposed either to reconcile the unique features of giant viruses with previous paradigms or to propose a completely new vision of the living world. I briefly review here how several other lines of research in virology converged during the last 2 decades with the discovery of giant viruses to change our traditional perception of the viral world. This story emphasizes the power of multidisciplinary curiosity-driven research, from the hospital to the field and the laboratory. Notably, some philosophers have now also joined biologists in their quest to make sense of the abundance and diversity of viruses and related capsidless mobile elements in the biosphere.

giant viruses, virion, phage, virocell, life definition
Topic: dna viruses virion viruses giant viruses
Issue Section: Emerging Concepts and Strategies in Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases

For years, most biologists considered viruses as byproducts of biological evolution that could only play a minor role in the history of life. This has gradually changed recently as a result of several advances in different fields of biology. The molecular ecologists focusing on “viromes” have highlighted the extraordinary abundance of viral particles and viral genes in the environment, including our own bodies ([1, 2 and references therein). We are hosts of a myriad of viruses infecting our eukaryotic cells but also of viruses (phages) that coevolve with our microbiota (Figure 1) [2]. More generally, one can conclude that most genetic information on our planet originated in viruses and related capsidless elements [3, 4]. Structural biologists have shown unexpected kinship between viruses infecting organisms that belong to different cellular domains (Archaea, Bacteria, or Eukarya) by identifying homologous traits in the structure of proteins forming the viral capsids [5], strongly suggesting that viruses were present on our planet long before the last universal common/cellular ancestor [6]. At the same time, the study of archaeal viruses revealed a fascinating world of different viruses previously unknown in bacteria and eukaryotes, revealing that each of the 3 domains of life overlaps with a different part of the virosphere [7]. To top it all, the discovery of giant viruses in the laboratory of Didier Raoult in Marseille has caught the imagination of the scientific community by revealing the existence of viruses whose genomes are greater than those of many bacteria and archaea [8]. The Phocean city is now the mecca of giant virology, with the continuous discovery of viruses with still bigger and bigger genomes by the laboratories of Didier Raoult, Jean-Michel Claverie, and Chantal Abergel (for recent reviews, see [9, 10]). Some of these viruses, such as Mimivirus, Pandoravirus, and Pithovirus, produce virions that are bigger than some small archaeal or bacterial cells (Figure 2) and are still visible with an optical microscope. When first observed following hospital infection (for Mimivirus) or in thin sections of eukaryotic cells by protistologists (for Pandoravirus), they were first confused with small bacterial (Mimivirus staining gram positive) or even with small eukaryotic cells. It became difficult to consider that these viruses—mimicking microbes—were not living organisms. Finally, some of these viruses can be infected by their own viruses, the virophages, raising the question of whether it is possible for a virus (the virophage) to infect a nonliving organism. All of these findings have revived interest in viruses and rested the issue of their definition, their nature—living or not—and the definition of life itself [11, 12].

THE TRADITIONAL VIEW OF VIRUSES
Traditionally, viruses, the ultimate parasites, have been considered to be at the border between living and nonliving. Many authors have concluded that viruses are not living because they lack autonomy and metabolism ([13 and references therein). This conclusion was even officially endorsed by the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses. This led most evolutionists to consider viruses as byproducts of biological evolution that could not have played an important role in the history of life. For instance, Moreira and López-García wrote that “viruses have only played a minor role in shaping the gene content of cells” [13]. As a consequence, viruses are still often missing in textbooks devoted to the origin and evolution of life and in scenarios describing the major steps of life history on our planet. Hence, Koonin and Wolf recently correctly noticed that “viruses are no part of the modern synthesis or more generally the traditional narrative of evolutionary biology” [14]. A damaging consequence of this view is that several evolutionists failed to recognize that viruses can be the cradle of new genes and new functions. Viruses are often viewed as passive entities that are used to rob cellular genes but cannot provide themselves new genes to cellular organisms. For instance, Moreira and Brochier-Armanet concluded from phylogenetic analyses focusing on Mimivirus genes with cellular homologs that this giant virus is a chimera that acquired most of these genes by horizontal gene transfer, either from its eukaryotic hosts or from bacteria sharing the same hosts [15] (see [16] for a critical analysis of their phylogenies and interpretation). In my opinion, this misleading conclusion (viruses are in fact responsible for the origin of most genes in nature, including cellular genes; see [3] and discussion below) originated from the classical assimilation of the viruses to their virions (viral particles). For instance, a well-known definition of viruses posits that viruses, unlike cells, only contain one type of nucleic acid (RNA or DNA) [17], forgetting that DNA viruses have both DNA genome and messenger RNA. Virions are inert structures that lack metabolism and more closely resemble cellular organelles, justifying the current claim that viruses, being likened to their virions, cannot be alive.

THE VIROCELL CONCEPT
Several authors in the past have pointed out that viruses should not be confused with their virions and that viruses can be considered as “living” during the intracellular stage of their reproduction (life) cycle [18–20]. I recently proposed the concept of “virocell” to focus on the cellular step of the viral cycle that involves the transformation of all or part of the infected host into a viral “living organism” ([11, 21] and references therein). In the virocell, the virus expresses its own metabolism and autonomy as the “aim” of the infected cell is no longer to give 2 daughter cells but to produce as many virions as possible to allow the reproduction and multiplication of the viral information. The virocell concept ends up considering viruses as cellular organisms for part of their reproduction cycle. Being organisms, they can be strict parasites but also live in symbiosis with the infected cell. This can produce various forms of equilibrium between the virus and its cellular host, the ribocell (a cell encoding ribosomes). Coexistence of the viruses and the infected organism (a bacterium, an archaeon, or an eukaryote) in the same “ribovirocell” can be short lived or very persistent, leading to various forms of long-term symbioses [22–24]. These relationships are especially complex in the case of RNA or DNA viruses infecting complex eukaryotic cells. It is fascinating that even small RNA viruses encoding only a few genes can completely reorganize the behavior of giant eukaryotic cells. These viruses can produce complex viral factories by manipulating various types of cell membrane [25] and reorganize the cellular metabolism and the expression of hundreds or thousands of genes with only a handful of expressed viral proteins [26].

VIRUSES AND RELATED CAPSIDLESS MOBILE ELEMENTS AS CRADLES OF NEW GENES
In my view, the main merit of the virocell concept is to highlight the fact that viruses can be the cradles of new genes produced during the intracellular step of viral genome replication. Comparative genomic analyses of closely related yeast and Drosophila strains have recently revealed how new genes are formed during genome evolution [27, 28]. Most genes seem to originate from “protogenes” corresponding to short piece of intergenic DNA that are randomly transcribed and translated. These protogenes appear and disappear continuously as long as they are not useful for the organism. However, if a peptide so produced turns out to be beneficial for the fitness of the organism, the protogene encoding it will be stabilized and progressively transformed into a gene. There is no reason not to believe that this mechanism, which has been observed in cellular genomes, did not occur in viral genomes. This would explain why the genomes of viruses and related capsidless mobile elements contain many small genes that have often no homolog, even in the genomes of closely related viruses. The multiple rounds of viral genome replication that take place in virocells and the stunning abundance of viral genomes in the biosphere thus explain well why viral genes are so diverse and numerous, representing the vast majority of the genosphere. In turn, this viral genosphere represents an unlimited reservoir of new genes—thus putative new functions—for the cellular world itself as viral genomes continuously integrate themselves in cellular genomes. The exaptation of viral proteins is thus a major source of new functions in the cellular world. A dramatic example of such domestication was provided by the discovery that major proteins involved in the formation of the placenta in mammals originated from retroviral proteins (for review, see [29]). The syncytins that are involved in cell fusion for placenta formation are indeed derived from retroviral env genes and exhibit anti-immunosuppressive properties that evolved during the previous arms race between animal cells and retroviruses. Beside syncytins, another protein of retroviral origin, Peg10, derived from a gag gene, apparently plays a critical role in placenta development [29]. From the virus viewpoint, Villarreal suggested that the complex genetic network involved in the placenta formation originated from the manipulation by retroviruses (for their own benefit) of mammal regulatory networks in the framework of long-term persistent infection [30].

The coevolution of viruses and cells that started billions years ago and is still going on today in our microbiota and everywhere in the biosphere thus most likely shaped the history of life more than any other major evolutionary force [3, 4, 29]. Several hypotheses have been put forward that suggest a viral (virocell) origin for proteins responsible for major evolutionary transitions such as the origin of DNA [31, 32], the origin of the prokaryotic and eukaryotic immune systems [33], or the origin of the eukaryotic nucleus [34] (and references therein). In particular, the complex viral factory produced by Mimivirus in the cytoplasm of the infected cell (Figure 3) makes it reasonable to suggest an evolutionary link between the cellular nucleus (a chromosome factory) and the viral factories of giant viruses. It now seems likely that many aspects of eukaryotic cellular and molecular biology evolved as byproducts of the continuous interaction between evolving protoeukaryotic cells and the ancestors of modern giant viruses infecting them [34]. The well-known impact of integrated viral genomes on the infectivity of bacterial pathogens and the control of the microbiota by viruses and related capsidless mobile elements are another critical aspect of this long-term coevolution between viruses and cells [35]. The deciphering of this coevolution will most likely be critical in understanding the origin and evolution of many infectious diseases.

A PHILOSOPHICAL TOUCH
The virocell concept a priori removes the traditional obstacles to consider viruses as living, as the virocell expresses a specific viral metabolism and a high degree of autonomy [11, 36]. The virocells are subject to selection pressure, which justifies considering that viruses are not evolved by cells (ribocells stricto sensu) as previously suggested [13], but that viruses are evolved by virocells [11]. Interestingly, considering that viruses are alive raises new problems that are worth considering in philosophical terms, using biological examples as a case study. Viruses have been defined as capsid-encoding organisms (or virion-producing organisms) by opposition to cells defined as ribosome-encoding organisms [37]. This definition allows for discrimination between viruses and other mobile capsidless elements, such as plasmids, that do not encode for capsid proteins. It has been noticed that the smallest known virus, whose genome encodes only 2 genes—one encoding a replication protein, the other a capsid protein—can be distinguished from the smallest plasmid with a single gene, encoding a replication protein, precisely by the presence in the viral genome of the gene encoding a capsid protein [38]. If one considers that a virus is living whereas a plasmid is not (something widely assumed by most biologists), this means that the presence or absence of a single gene (in that case, the gene encoding the capsid protein) is sufficient to shift from living to nonliving, from organism to macromolecule. This is of course absurd. A similar reasoning can be made in the case of the difference between an intracellular bacterium (definitely living for all biologists) and an intracellular organelle such as a mitochondrion or a chloroplast (definitely not living for most biologists). It is impossible (and absurd) to determine at which moment, during the evolution that led from an intracellular bacterium to a mitochondria or a chloroplast, the living organism became a nonliving organelle [11].

WHAT IS LIFE? AN EXTENDED VIEW
The impossibility to rigorously define a living organism vs a cellular organelle can be viewed as a serious philosophical impasse. At that stage, one should be reminded that the concept of life has been originally associated with human life (by opposition to death) and endorses a high dose of anthropomorphism and sanctity. In biology, the concept of life has been from the very beginning tainted of vitalism and we realize now, especially in studying the world of microorganisms, that using the terms “life” and “living organisms” in a scientific framework is not such an easy thing (for an interesting report on this issue, see [39]). From a materialistic viewpoint, I recently proposed, in a somewhat provocative way, to consider all living biological entities (proteins, chromosomes, plasmids) that participate in a living process to be alive [11]. In that case, it remains to define what is meant by “biological entities” and “living process.” In philosophical terms, a biological entity could be equated to a biological “individual,” an individual being an entity “which is separable, countable, has acceptably clear-cut spatial boundaries, and … the capacity to remain the same while changing through time” [40]. This would avoid the claim that a gene is living because, unlike, for instance, chromosomes, genes are not “individuals” but human concepts that can be defined in different ways, especially in the case of eukaryotes. Similarly, a protein could be living but a protein “domain” could not. Defining a living process could be done tentatively by opposing life and death, in fact coming back to the original definition of life. For instance, one could consider that a protein is living as long as it can be functional in a living cell, but dead if it is irreversibly denatured. In that definition of living entities, a virion, not only a virocell, can be considered as living as long as it can potentially infect successfully a host cell. After ultraviolet treatment, the virion can be “dead” if its genome is irreversibly damaged. The merits of such a broad definition of living entities are 2-fold. On the one hand, it allows using the concept of “life” and “living” in biology, bypassing the impossibility to define “living” vs “nonliving” biological entities in the traditional definition of life based on autonomy. On the other hand, it clearly eliminates all “sanctified” or “vitalistic” aspect of the terms “life” and “living.” Life and living processes are simply names for complex evolving forms of matter that are now present on our planet.

