Why Are There So Many Diverse Replication Machineries?
Highlights
•
Replicon model initiated study of DNA replication in Bacteria.

•
Many different types of replicons (Bacteria, Archaea/Eukarya, virus) have been revealed.

•
A link between Pol α and the overall organization of eukaryotic chromosome is suggested.

•
Eukarya DNA Pol α may have originated from a mobile element of viral origin.

•
Diversity of DNA replication machineries may have originated in the ancient virosphere.

Abstract
The replicon model has initiated a major research line in molecular biology: the study of DNA replication mechanisms. Until now, the majority of studies have focused on a limited set of model organisms, mainly from Bacteria or Opisthokont eukaryotes (human, yeasts) and a few viral systems. However, molecular evolutionists have shown that the living world is more complex and diverse than believed when the operon model was proposed. Comparison of DNA replication proteins in the three domains, Archaea, Bacteria, and Eukarya, have surprisingly revealed the existence of two distinct sets of non-homologous cellular DNA replication proteins, one in Bacteria and the other in Archaea and Eukarya, suggesting that the last universal common ancestor possibly still had an RNA genome. A major puzzle is the presence in eukaryotes of the unfaithful DNA polymerase alpha (Pol α) to prime Okazaki fragments. Interestingly, Pol α is specifically involved in telomere biosynthesis, and its absence in Archaea correlates with the absence of telomeres. The recent discovery of telomere-like GC quartets in eukaryotic replication origins suggests a link between Pol α and the overall organization of the eukaryotic chromosome. As previously proposed by Takemura, Pol α might have originated from a mobile element of viral origin that played a critical role in the emergence of the complex eukaryotic genomes. Notably, most large DNA viruses encode DNA replication proteins very divergent from their cellular counterparts. The diversity of viral replication machineries compared to cellular ones suggests that DNA and DNA replication mechanisms first originated and diversified in the ancient virosphere, possibly explaining why they are so many different types of replication machinerie.

Abbreviations
Pol α polymerase alpha LUCA last universal common ancestor OGRE origin G-rich repeated element
Keywords
DNA replication DNA polymerase alpha Archaeaviral DNA replication evolution

Introduction
The replicon model was proposed 50 years ago in the wake of the operon model as another major pillar of nascent molecular and cellular biology [1], [2]. The simplicity of the model, with only two major actors, the replicator and the initiator, was reminiscent of the operon's simplicity, with the duet operator and repressor. The replicon model was the final achievement of a golden decade in molecular biology that started with Watson and Crick's paper on the double helical structure of DNA [3], followed by Meselson and Stahl's demonstration of the semi-conservative nature of DNA replication [4], the discovery by Arthur Kornberg's group of the first DNA polymerase [5], and the visualization by Cairns of the replicating bacterial chromosome [6]. The replicon model opened a Pandora's box for geneticists and biochemists eager to provide flesh to the model by identifying its components in various biological systems. In the last 50 years, they have progressively uncovered the veil that previously covered the “replicator” (a combination of the replication origin and replisome) at the double helix. The replication origin of Bacteria [7], Eukarya [8], and Archaea [9] and the associated initiator DNA replication proteins, DnaA for Bacteria [10], Cdc6 and the ORC complex for Eukarya [11], [12], and Cdc6/Orc1 for Archaea [13], were successively identified. In vitro systems of active replisomes have been designed for Bacteria [14] and Eukarya [15], allowing in-depth analyses of the events occurring at the replication origins, but they are still missing in Archaea. These dramatic advances have been reported at regular replicon birthday meetings that have taken place in 1983, 2003, and 2013.

In the period between the last two meetings, we have experienced the benefits of the genomic revolution. Striking advances have been made in deciphering the mechanisms that trigger DNA replication in human and a few other metazoans, thanks to the completion of the human genome sequencing projects. We have started to accumulate critical information on the number, nature, and diversity of metazoan replication origins and how they are controlled in cells from different tissues and at various stages of the cell cycle having dramatic implications for human biology [16], [17]. For a long time, scientists have linked the mechanisms of DNA replication initiation and its regulation to cancer research in their grant applications. Now, it seems that these links could be more than sophistry used to convince funding agencies. Furthermore, beyond cancer research, understanding the control of DNA replication during cell development now appears to open new avenues in a wide range of medical research ventures, such as stem cell reprogramming.

In parallel to high-throughput studies of the post-genomic era, the association of biologists and physicists has provided in the last decade many rewarding results at the extreme reductionist level, by applying advanced imaging techniques to single-molecule/cell analyses. Initiated at the end of the last century with analyses focusing on bacterial chromosome movement within bacterial cells [18], [19], these studies have now revealed the localization of replisomes in the nucleus of complex cells [20]. Another degree of sophistication has been reached by combining advanced imaging techniques with single-molecule and/or single-cell data [21]. Recent data could challenge traditional models, such as the trombone model that predicts the looping of the lagging strand onto itself to allow the concerted movement of one DNA polymerase working on the lagging strand with another working on the leading strand [22]. The idea was to prevent dissociation of the lagging strand polymerase after completion of an Okazaki fragment. This two-polymerase trombone model, validated for T4 DNA replication by electron microscopic images of the reconstituted replisome in vitro[23], was extrapolated to the bacterial, archaeal, and eukaryotic systems without much experimental evidence (see the multiple replication forks depicted in Google images). Single-cell analysis of tagged DNA polymerases now indicates that three DNA polymerases, not two, are active at the Escherichia coli replication fork and that the polymerase that synthesizes the Okazaki fragment dissociates anyway from the DNA template, while remaining in the vicinity of the fork through continuous interaction with the primase/helicase complex. Given this evidence, should we abandon the trombone model for cellular DNA replication? Future studies with tagged eukaryotic and archaeal DNA polymerases will hopefully address this fundamental aspect of DNA replication.

The tendency to extrapolate discoveries made using a particular model system to the whole biosphere is a permanent temptation for scientists who aim to discover general rules of the living world and not simple idiosyncrasies. However, this temptation can be strongly misleading and I will argue here in favor of approaches that take more into account the diversity of the biosphere and that put evolutionary thinking first.

The Unity versus Diversity of Life
For molecular biologists of the last century, “what is true for E. coli is true for an elephant” [24]. The traditional approach for the pioneers was to start working on E. coli in order to pave the way for followers brave enough to tackle similar problems in yeast, and later in mammals. Before being isolated from regenerating rat liver, calf thymus, or other sources of eukaryotic cells, many DNA replication proteins were first isolated from E. coli. Surprisingly, early on, it was observed that the aphorism “what is true for E. coli is true for an elephant” is not valid for DNA replication proteins. For instance, this was noticed by biochemists who discovered that the first isolated eukaryotic DNA polymerase [DNA polymerase alpha (Pol α)] has an associated primase activity lacking in its bacterial counterpart [25]. The dramatic differences between bacterial and eukaryotic DNA replication proteins were confirmed later when gene sequences became available since it turned out that bacterial and eukaryotic replicases belong to different DNA polymerase families (C and B, respectively). Later on, comparative genomics confirmed that the three major proteins involved in DNA replication—the replicative polymerases, helicases, and primases—belong to different protein superfamilies; in other words, they are not homologous [26], [27], [28], [29]. This raises a major question: why do living organisms use two different non-homologous DNA replication protein sets today instead of one as expected if the last universal common ancestor (LUCA) already had a DNA genome? This dramatic observation led to provocative hypotheses suggesting either that LUCA was endowed with two distinct DNA replication machineries [27] or that it still had an RNA genome. In the latter case, it was suggested that DNA replication mechanisms (and possibly DNA itself) originated twice independently, once in the bacterial lineage and another time in a common ancestor to eukaryotes and Archaea [26], [28], [30].

Molecular biologists, especially those working on DNA replication, are typically reluctant to discuss much about these evolutionary issues in more detail and instead have preferred for long-term mechanistic approaches focusing on a few model organisms, with emphasis progressively shifting from bacteria to yeast, human, and a few mammalian systems. In the meantime, molecular evolutionists have revealed that all terrestrial organisms cannot be grouped under the flags of E. coli and elephants. In 1977, Carl Woese and colleagues had discovered a third group of organisms distantly related from both, Archaea (formerly archaebacteria), and studies of these third forms of life produced astonishing results [31], [32], [33]. In particular, it turns out that their molecular biology is much more similar to that of eukaryotic ones than to that of classical “prokaryotic” ones. In other words, one can often say that what is true for Pyrococcus—an archaeon living at 90–105 °C in volcanic hot springs—is true for an elephant[34]. This is especially striking in the case of DNA replication, since Eukarya and Archaea use mostly homologous proteins unrelated to bacterial ones. There is a strong evolutionary link between the eukaryotic and archaeal replication apparatus that can be approximately considered as two versions of the same replication machinery. Many laboratories are now involved in the study of archaeal DNA replication, and their importance is acknowledged in the remarkable textbook of DePamphilis and Bell that covers all aspects of genome duplication by systematically comparing the discoveries made in the three domains of life [35].

The discovery of Archaea opened another era of comparative biochemistry, giving new clues to understand the evolutionary paths that led to the modern biosphere and raising new questions. Here, I will focus on the “Okazaki fragments puzzle” that seems to challenge the traditional view of life evolution from “primitive” prokaryotes to “higher” eukaryotes. I will question the presence of DNA Pol α in eukaryotes, a mysterious and unexpected enzyme with possible viral origin. I will emphasize the diversity of viral DNA replication proteins, suggesting that the answer to the question “why are there so many DNA replication machineries?” lies in the viral origin of DNA.

The Okazaki Fragments Puzzle
A major difference between the bacterial and eukaryal replication process concerns the size of Okazaki fragments and the mechanisms of their synthesis and maturation [36], [37] (Fig. 1, Fig. 2). The bacterial system appears elegant and efficient; only two enzymes are required: the primase DnaG, a monomeric protein of the Toprim superfamily, and the Holo DNA polymerase III. In combination, these two enzymes synthesize long Okazaki fragments (between 1 and 2 kb) at the astonishing rate of 1 kb/s. By comparison, the eukaryotic system appears odd and tedious. A combination of three enzymes (the heterodimeric primase PriSL, the Holo Pol α, and Pol δ) synthesizes short Okazaki fragments at only 0.05 kb/s. In that case, Bacteria look more like higher organisms than primitive ones, as often tacitly assumed! The mechanism of Okazaki fragments maturation also seems more simple and elegant in Bacteria, with a single enzyme (DNA polymerase I) able to remove the RNA primer and fill the gap in the same step, whereas the eukaryotic and archaeal mechanisms involve the interaction of the replicative polymerase with one or two nucleases and the single-stranded binding protein RPA (Fig. 2).

It has always puzzled biochemists why the eukaryotic DNA replication machinery synthesizes short Okazaki fragments at such a low rate in order to replicate chromosomes that are usually much larger than those of bacteria! It is often suggested that the short size of eukaryotic Okazaki fragments is due to the nucleosomal structure of eukaryotic chromatin “since the average size of Okazaki fragments is similar to the length of DNA associated with mononucleosomes” [36]. However, this is unlikely to be the sole hypothesis since different species of Archaea, regardless of whether or not they contain homologues of eukaryotic histones, produce Okazaki fragments comparable in size to those of Eukarya [38]. Furthermore, archaeal histones seem to form dimeric particles, protecting DNA segments much shorter (around 30 nucleotides long) than Okazaki fragments [39]. This is a clear example where the comparison of the archaeal and eukaryotic systems helps to reject false assumption.

The mechanism for Okazaki fragment synthesis could have been a priori similar between Archaea and Eukarya, since the fragments are of the same size and Archaea contain homologues of the eukaryotic PriSL primase. However, there is a major difference; in eukaryotes, the RNA primer synthesized by PriSL (around 12 nucleotides) is first extended with around 25 nucleotides of DNA by Pol α to form an RNA/DNA hybrid primer that is later on elongated up to 150–250 bp by Pol δ. In contrast, the RNA primer synthesized by PriSL is directly elongated by the replicative DNA polymerase in Archaea, which have no Pol α (Fig. 1). This possibly explains why Archaea replicate DNA about 10 times faster than eukaryotes [9].

So why do eukaryotes need Pol α for Okazaki fragments formation [40], [41]? There is no clear answer to this puzzling question. Traditionally, in the prokaryote/eukaryote paradigm, the simplified versions of eukaryotic molecular systems present in Archaea are viewed as the ancestral (primitive) version that became more complex (sophisticated) in eukaryotes. However, it is difficult to understand what kind of “progress” was brought by the introduction of Pol α in eukaryotes. On the contrary, besides possibly slowing down the rate of fork movement, the introduction of Pol α into the picture had a major drawback, since this enzyme lacks the endonuclease activity required for proofreading. As a consequence, Pol α is about a hundred times less faithful than Pol δ and can introduce mistakes in the DNA portion of the DNA/RNA hybrid primer [42].

Notably, the mechanism of Okazaki fragments maturation in eukaryotes seems to have been specially designed to eliminate putative mistakes introduced by Pol α, by specifically removing the DNA portion made by this polymerase during the priming process (Fig. 2). The strand displacement activity of Pol δ precisely displaces the RNA/DNA primer of this fragment from the template strand (with the help of the RPA complex) when it reaches the 5′ end of the next Okazaki fragment in such a way that the Dna2 and Fen-1 Flap endonucleases remove the DNA portion made by Pol α [36]. From this point of view, Pol α is complete nonsense. Why introduce into the system a polymerase whose product has to be removed anyway? Could it be that the archaeal DNA replication machinery is not a primitive version of the eukaryotic one, but an improved and more efficient streamlined version? In agreement with this provocative suggestion, Archaea apparently use the eukaryotic mechanism for Okazaki fragments maturation that has been a priori designed to correct the potential mistakes made by Pol α! Indeed, Archaea contain homologues of both RPA and Fen-1, and in vitro reconstitution suggests that these archaeal proteins are indeed involved in Okazaki fragment maturation [43], [44]. Could it be that the archaeal system originated by streamlining from the eukaryotic system and that the maturation of Okazaki fragments in Archaea is a relic of the eukaryotic system? In that case, Archaea cannot be the ancestor of eukaryotes but instead are possibly derived from some proto-eukaryotic lineage in which Pol α was still present (arrow with question mark in Fig. 3).

It has been recently claimed that phylogenetic analyses demonstrate that eukaryotes are derived from an archaeal ancestor [46]. However, several authors have reported contradictory results on this point. Moreover, careful comparison of their data suggests that we are “in a phylogenetic impasse”, probably because phylogenetic signals have been erased for such ancient divergence [47]. Personally, I favor evolutionary scenarios in which Archaea and Eukarya evolved from a common ancestor that was more complex than modern Archaea, but not as complex as modern eukaryotes. In fact, recent evidence from comparative genomics have shown indeed that the last archaeal common ancestor was probably more complex than modern Archaea [48], [49]. Reductive evolution seems to be a very general trend in genome evolution, a concept that has only recently been appreciated [50]. If reductive evolution already operated before the last archaeal common ancestor, it is possible that the common ancestor of Archaea and Eukarya still synthesized Okazaki fragments using the complex eukaryotic system with its odd DNA Pol α and that Archaea were “clever enough” to streamline the system to produce a more efficient one (arrow with question mark in Fig. 3). In any case, it remains to be understood why and how Pol α entered into the picture.

DNA Pol α and Telomeres: An Evolutionary Connection?
Interestingly, Pol α is the enzyme that synthesizes the lagging strand of telomeric DNA, using the DNA strand synthesized by the telomerase as a template [51]. Physical interaction has been detected between the telomeric proteins Cdc13 and DNA Pol α (Pol1) in Saccharomyces cerevisiae[52], whereas the single-stranded DNA binding telomeric proteins Ctc1 and Stn1 stimulate Pol α [53], [54]. The specific requirement of Pol α for telomere formation reveals an intriguing correlation between the presence/absence of telomeres and those of Pol α, since telomeres are specific eukaryotic features that are missing in Archaea. It is also interesting to note that Pol α interacts with several eukaryotic proteins that have no homologues in Archaea such as AAF, Ctf4, MCM10, and Cdc45 [54], [55]. It is tempting to speculate that Pol α and its associated proteins were introduced in a proto-eukaryotic lineage at the same time as telomere. We are then faced with two possibilities, either Archaea never acquired Pol α because they never acquired telomeres or both telomeres and Pol α were lost in the branch of the universal tree leading to Archaea (in the reductive scenario) (Fig. 3).

Telomerases are nucleoproteins that synthesize DNA using their own associated RNAs as template. These RNA-dependent DNA polymerases are evolutionarily related to reverse transcriptases of retroviruses [56] and telomeres themselves are evolutionarily related to retroelements of the Penelope family [57]. Penelope retroelements can bind to the linear extremities of eukaryotic chromosomes, suggesting that modern eukaryotic telomeres originally arose from ancient retroelements that integrated the extremities of the chromosomes of ancient eukaryotes. These ancient retroelements were possibly replicated by the ancestors of Pol α and that Pol α was brought into the eukaryotic system by these retroelements (Fig. 3).

Beside telomeres, the other major hallmarks of eukaryotic chromosomes (absent in Archaea) are centromeres. Interestingly, centromeres are rich in retroelements and tandem repeats derived from retroelements [58], and it has been shown that a Pol α proccessivity protein, Mcl1 is required for the propagation of centromere structure in fission yeast [59], again suggesting a key role of this polymerase in shaping the unique features of eukaryotic chromosomes.

Telomeres and OGREs: A DNA Pol α Connection?
A characteristic feature of eukaryotic telomeres is their GC richness [51]. The strand synthesized by the telomerase is a repetition of G-rich motifs. Before being used as template by Pol α, this strand is elongated as a protruding single strand with a 3′ end. As a consequence, this G-rich strand can fold back onto itself to form G-quartets in which four guanines are linked together by Hoogsteen bonds [60]. These structures, together with associated proteins, possibly protect telomeric DNA against degradation. Surprisingly, bioinformatic analyses have recently shown that metazoan replication origins are also rich in sequences that can trigger the formation of G-quartets [17]. These regions have been called OGREs (Origin G-rich Repeated Elements). The authors of these analyses predict that G-quadruplex structures might be structural elements controlling the choice or activation of replication origins.

Replication origins and telomeres thus share two common features in metazoan: they are both rich in potential G-quartets located on single-stranded DNA regions and they both serve as initiation sites for Pol α. Notably, the recognition of primase sites by Pol α in origin regions and on the G-rich strand of telomeric DNA has not yet been defined. It is therefore tempting to imagine that G-quartet, a common feature of replication origins and telomeres, could be somehow used as signals for Pol α. This prediction seems to be worth testing experimentally. One can also speculate that eukaryotes replication origins and telomeres may have been initially recruited from the same source, that is, the selfish element encoding the Pol α ancestor. This hypothesis is also testable since it predicts that OGRE-type origins were already present in the last eukaryotic common ancestor and, as a consequence, should not be limited presently to metazoan but more widely distributed in the eukaryotic domain. This again argues in favor of studying DNA replication in a much wider diversity of eukaryotic organisms.

The Origin of DNA Pol α
The synthesis of small RNA/DNA hybrids by Pol α could have been a relic of a very ancient, poorly effective DNA replication mechanism (low speed, low fidelity). In that case, Pol α itself should be very ancient and possibly very divergent from other DNA polymerases of the B family (Pol B). However, this is not the case. The Pol B family can be divided into two very divergent subfamilies: one includes all viral and cellular Pol B that use an RNA primer, including Pol α, and the other includes all viral and plasmidic Pol B that use a protein primer [61]. It is thus unclear if the ancestral Pol B used a protein or an RNA primer, but in any case, Pol α emerged relatively late during the evolution of this family. Notably, in phylogenies of RNA-primed Pol B, DNA Pol α is not specifically related to other replicative eukaryotic DNA polymerases (δ and ε) or to archaeal DNA polymerases [61]. In fact, the relationships between the different subgroups of Pol B (alpha, delta, epsilon, archaeal, bacterial) are not resolved, and all these groups are intermixed with several groups of Pol B encoded by viruses with large DNA genomes, such as T4-like bacterioviruses, Herpesviridae, Baculoviridae, and various groups of megavirales (formerly nucleocytoplasmic large DNA viruses). Based on these analyses, several authors, including myself, have suggested that eukaryotic (and possibly also archaeal) Pol B originated from viruses [40], [62], [63], [64]. Notably, Takemura specifically suggested a viral origin for Pol α to support his hypothesis of a viral origin for the eukaryotic nucleus [40].

A viral origin of Pol α can be reconciled with the idea that Pol α originated from a selfish retroelement at the origin of telomeres because it has been observed that large DNA viruses sometimes contain retroviruses integrated into their genomes [65]. This suggests that eukaryotic chromosomes could have partially derived from the linear genome of a DNA virus encoding the ancestor of Pol α (Fig. 3). This genome may have used for telomeres a Penelope-related retroelement that integrated at its extremities, which later became the ancestor of modern eukaryotic telomeres. In this scenario, it remains to be understood why this virus used an unfaithful DNA polymerase. Could it be that the Pol α gene was itself initially a selfish element that propagates in association with a retroelement? In that case, it was advantageous for this selfish gene to evolve rapidly. This selfish element could then integrate into the genome of a large linear DNA virus encoding a faithful DNA polymerase, possibly the ancestor of Pol δ (Fig. 3).

In that scenario, the eukaryotic DNA replication machinery has evolved from the successive integration of giant viruses encoding their own DNA polymerases, explaining the existence of many different DNA polymerases in eukaryotes (Fig. 3) [45]. This would explain why these paralogous proteins do not form monophyletic groups in phylogenetic analyses but are dispersed between various groups of viral proteins [61]. This would also explain some curiosities of the eukaryotic DNA replication apparatus, such as the use of two different DNA polymerases, one for lagging strand synthesis (Pol δ) and another for leading strand synthesis (Pol ε). Pol ε is very divergent from Pol δ in terms of sequence similarity and exhibits a very large C-terminal extension, indicating that Pol ε and Pol δ probably did not diverge recently by gene duplication in the eukaryotic lineage. Furthermore, Pol ε interacts with proteins such as Mrc1, TopBP1, and Cdc45 that have no orthologues in Archaea, again suggesting an independent evolutionary origin for the two replicases at the eukaryotic replication fork [66], [67], [68]. Notably, whereas Pol δ absolutely requires the PCNA clamp (which has a homologue in Archaea) for efficient synthesis, Pol ε carries its own clamp formed by its accessory subunits [69]. This is reminiscent of the accessory subunit of the DNA polymerase of the herpes virus (HSV1), which also forms an intrinsic DNA polymerase clamp [70] (Fig. 3).

The interaction of Pol δ with RPA and PCNA, two proteins that have archaeal homologues, and its role in Okazaki fragment synthesis and maturation (a mechanism conserved between Archaea and Eukarya) suggest that Pol δ, the most conserved of the eukaryotic polymerases, is evolutionarily related to one of the two Pol B that was present in the last archaeal eukaryotic common ancestor (Fig. 3). On the other hand, phylogenetic analyses suggest that Pol δ also originated in fine from viral polymerases encoded by large DNA viruses [61], [62]. This would imply that both archaeal and eukaryal Pol B were initially recruited from viruses, either in the common lineage leading to Archaea and Eukarya or after the divergence of the two lineages (Fig. 3).

Why Are There So Many Viral DNA Replication Machineries?
In discussing the origin and potential role of Pol α in eukaryotic DNA replication, viruses have entered the picture. Why would we consider viruses in this evolutionary scenario? This is not an intuitive way of thinking for many of us. As recently pointed out by Koonin and Wolf: “viruses are no part of the traditional narrative of evolutionary biology” [71]. Viruses have for a long time been cornered by biologists influenced by a reductionist vision as either good model systems to study basic cellular function or bad pathogens to be eradicated. Molecular biologists working on DNA replication have been grateful to viruses as a convenient source of small DNA substrates for in vitro DNA replication assays. The saga of M13, ΦX174, or SV40 as model systems to isolate components of the cellular replication apparatus is one of the major ventures of the last century in biology [72]. However, the study of viral DNA replication was viewed as a springboard before studying more important organisms, such as human (or mouse) DNA replication. Even when molecular biologists studied the DNA replication apparatus of complex DNA viruses encoding their own replication proteins such as T4, T7, adenovirus, or herpes virus, they justified themselves by explaining that these systems would provide important information relevant to cellular systems.

In 1999, in order to explain the puzzling DNA replication problem previously mentioned (why two sets of cellular DNA replication proteins?), I published a paper in which I suggested that either the bacterial or the archaeal/eukaral DNA replication apparatus was recruited from a virus and replaced the ancestral system present in LUCA [29]. I suggested considering viruses precisely because they tell us that we should not only recognize two different replication machineries when proposing evolutionary scenarios, but much more. The T4 DNA replication machinery is different from both the bacterial and the archaeal/eukaryotic one, with some components distantly related to bacterial proteins (e.g., primase, helicase), whereas others are more related to eukaryotic ones (e.g., polymerase, clamp and clamp loader, DNA ligase, type II DNA topoisomerase) [73]. However, in both cases, the T4 proteins exhibit low sequence similarities with their cellular homologues, being only members of the same protein family, such as Toprim helicase or family B DNA polymerase. Similar to T4, herpes viruses, nudiviruses, and megavirales encode unique DNA replication proteins very divergent from the cellular counterparts and very divergent between these different viral lineages [74], [75]. Another atypical DNA replication machinery is found in the mitochondria, which utilizes DNA polymerase gamma and a primase/helicase fusion protein. This machinery, together with the mitochondrial RNA polymerase (also possibly involved in priming), was most likely recruited from a T3/T7-like virus integrated in the genome of the alpha-proteobacterium at the origin of mitochondria [76]. The question is therefore not only “why two cellular DNA replication machineries, one in Bacteria, another in Archaea/Eukarya?” but also “why so many DNA replication machineries when the viral world is taken into account?”

The Out-of-Virus Scenario
The diversity of DNA replication machineries in viruses being greater than in cellular organisms suggests an analogous scenario to the diversity of human genetic markers in Africa compared to their relative uniformity to the rest of the world. This is the main argument in concluding that all modern Homo sapiens originated from Africa (the out of Africa scenario). Thus, one can suggest an “out of viruses scenario” for the origin of DNA replication machineries. This scenario posits that many different DNA replication machineries first originated in the viral world before transferring (for two of them, the bacterial and the archaeal/eukaryotic ones) to the cellular world [30], [63], [64]. This scenario has the advantage to finally explain why there are so many replicons. The first DNA replicons should have been very simple (single stranded), with few proteins involved (for instance, just a polymerase). In the course of viral evolution, several lineages of ancestral DNA viruses using different DNA polymerases then evolved more sophisticated systems by recruiting enzymes (DNA primases, DNA polymerase accessory proteins, helicases, single-stranded DNA binding proteins), finally producing double-stranded DNA in some viral lineages [77]. As DNA size increased, new problems had to be solved and new enzymes entered into the scene, such as proteins coupling leading and lagging strand synthesis and finally DNA topoisomerases. Hence, a few lineages of double-stranded DNA viruses evolved independently very complex DNA replication machineries. In my favorite scenario for the origin of replicons, these machineries were the ancestors of those present today both in cellular lineages and in various lineages of large DNA viruses.

The Viral Origin of DNA
One hypothesis leading to another, I thus wondered why DNA replication machineries would have first originated in viruses? This led me to suggest that DNA itself originated first in the viral world [30], [63]. There was indeed an obvious selection pressure that would have favored the RNA-to-DNA transition in viral lineage, that is, genome modification as a strategy to resist cellular attack against viral genomes. In addition, the stability of DNA over RNA is an advantage for an organism with an extracellular stage in its life cycle (the virion) in which the nucleic acid is stored within an inert particle devoid of repair activity. The viral origin of DNA hypothesis is compatible with the observation that many viruses encode proteins that are critical for the first steps of the RNA-to-DNA transition, ribonucleotide reductase to produce the substrates for DNA polymerization, reverse transcriptase to copy the RNA message into DNA, and finally thymidylate synthase to trigger the transition from DNA-U (DNA with uracil) into modern DNA-T (DNA with thymine). Viral ribonucleotide reductases and thymidylate synthases are most often very divergent from their cellular homologues, forming well-defined monophyletic groups [78], supporting (but not proving) the idea that ancient transfers of these enzymes might have occurred from viruses to cells. Finally, the viral origin of DNA scenario would explain why genomes and associated replication mechanisms are more diverse in viruses than in cells (with both RNA and DNA genomes, single-stranded and double-stranded ones) as illustrated in Fig. 4. In this scenario, the two types of replication machineries observed in modern cells appear to be a subset of all different types of replication machineries that originally appeared in early RNA-based cells and their viruses.

The viral origin of DNA hypothesis has been quite well received but should fight the prevalent view that viruses are nonliving, passive entities that cannot have created something so important than DNA for cellular life! For instance, Moreira and Lopez-Garcia refuted the possibility of putting viruses in the tree of life, stating that “viruses have played only a minor role in shaping the gene content of cells” [79]. Indeed, the traditional view is that viruses mainly evolve by picking cellular genes. This is well illustrated in a recent review on T4 DNA replication in which the authors wrote that “the T4 bacteriophage replication system seems to be a chimera, with functional modules borrowed from bacteria and eukaryotes” or else “the genome of T4 bacteriophage is a curiosity in that it is thought to be composed of genes derived from both eukaryotic and bacterial sources” [80]. This clearly reveals that the authors do not consider viruses as a possible source of new genes. However, we have seen that T4 proteins are extremely divergent from their cellular homologues, raising doubt about their cellular origin. It is often argued that high divergence between viral and cellular homologous proteins is due to the rapid evolution of viral proteins compared to cellular ones [79]. This is because some viral proteins indeed evolve rapidly to escape the immune systems or other defense mechanisms of the host. However, this is not obvious for all viral proteins, in particular for those encoded by large DNA viruses [81]. To come back to the T4 example, one could suggest from a “virocentric” view that bacterial and eukaryal replication systems both originally borrowed genes from viruses distantly related to modern T4.

The traditional view assuming that viruses are pickpockets of cellular genes but can seldom create new genes by themselves is probably entrenched in the current paradigm that assimilates viruses to their virions (the viral particle) [82], [83]. Virions are inert macromolecular structure that cannot of course produce new proteins such as ribonucleotide reductase or thymidylate synthase. It is nevertheless also obvious that viruses can produce new genes when their genomes replicate and/or recombine during the intracellular phase of the virus life cycle. However, this intracellular phase (also called eclipse phase or vegetative state) is usually not associated to the virus definition itself. Viruses are very often simply defined as: “a protein coat enclosing a nucleic acid” [84]. This probably explains why viral creativity is often underestimated. To counteract this tendency, I recently suggested a new name for the infected cell, the virocell [82], [83], [85]. This concept reminds us that the infected cell is more than an infected bacterium, archaeon, or eukaryotic cell; it is the active form of the virus, in which the latter is “living”, expressing, and reproducing its genome. In the viral origin of DNA, the first DNA replicon of course did not originate in a virion but in a virocell, corresponding to the transition from an RNA virocell to a DNA virocell (Fig. 5).

In summarizing the different steps that led me to propose the virocell concept, I realize now that this concept itself is in fine a consequence of the replicon theory. This theory opened the way for the search and discovery of proteins involved in DNA replication in both cells and viruses. This search surprisingly revealed two different sets of cellular replication proteins and many more sets of viral ones. This observation cannot be reconciled with the traditional view of a single DNA-based common ancestor with viruses coming from modern cellular replicons. It is necessary to think of more elaborated scenarios in which viruses play a more active role.

Conclusion
Future researches in the field of DNA replication will certainly for a large part follow the current trend toward systems biology. It is indeed crucial now to integrate the replicon into the whole cell fabric. It is already well known that DNA replication is linked with DNA repair and recombination, DNA repair with transcription, and all these systems with genome maintenance and reproduction. Several studies also suggest potential connections between DNA replication, metabolism, and protein synthesis [87], [88]. In the post-genomic era, new insights can be obtained, in particular from genome context analyses. For instance, Jonathan Berthon and myself have recently proposed the existence of a new protein network connecting replication and translation that is possibly conserved from Archaea to human [88], [89]. However, a potential drawback of systems biology is that it could maintain and possibly strengthen the present bias toward the study of a few model organisms only. We are so far to understand a complete organism as a collection of integrated systems that the temptation will be great to focus on simpler organisms and extrapolate preliminary observations. These approaches will always be limited. Fundamentally, organisms are not systems but historical products. As a consequence, it is not possible to understand them without a sound evolutionary framework.

Fortunately, we now have a rather good understanding of the biosphere in terms of natural divisions and their evolutionary relationships (even if many question marks remain; see, e.g., Ref. [47] for the problem of eukaryote origin). Molecular biologists working on DNA replication will finally benefit from comparative biochemistry. At the moment, most work on DNA replication is still performed on a few metazoan and yeast model species that both belong to the same eukaryotic division, opisthokonta. The five or six other eukaryotic divisions, including the one containing plants, are largely ignored. It should be extremely important now to analyze DNA replication mechanisms at the molecular level in several organisms of each eukaryotic, bacterial, and archaeal phylum and in all viral lineages to identify novel proteins and mechanisms and to get a comprehensive picture of the world of replicons. In particular, if several giant DNA viruses played an important role in the origin of eukaryotes and/or the eukaryotic nucleus, the study of DNA replication machineries in the various lineages of megavirales should bring critical new insights into the origin of the eukaryotic DNA replication mechanism. In any case, deciphering the interactions between the DNA replication proteins of giant DNA viruses and those of their eukaryotic victims should provide extremely important new data to understand eukaryotic molecular biology. It is thus my hope that, beside systems biology, more emphasis will be put on the diversity of model organisms in next replicon meetings and that evolutionary questions—such as “why are there so many replication machineries?”—will become central in our discussions.

