Infinite Series of Exact Equations in the Bak-Sneppen Model of Biological Evolution

We derive an infinite series of exact equations for the Bak-Sneppen (BS) model in arbitrary
dimensions. These equations relate different moments of temporal duration and spatial size of
avalanches. We prove that the exponents of the BS model are the same above and below the
critical point, and express the universal amplitude ratio of the avalanche spatial size in terms of the
critical exponents. The equations uniquely determine the shape of the scaling function of the avalanche
distribution. It is shown that in the BS model in arbitrary dimensions there is only one independent
critical exponent. [S0031-9007(96)00781-8]

Recently Bak and Sneppen [1] introduced a particularly
simple toy model of biological evolution (the BS model).
It provides a coarse-grained description of the behavior of
the ecosystem of interacting species driven by mutation
and natural selection. The features of the real evolutionary process, which may be correctly reproduced by this
model, include the intermittent behavior (punctuated equilibrium), the apparent scale invariance of large extinction
events [2], and the power law probability distribution of
the lifetimes of species. In the simplest variant of the BS
model the ecosystem consisting of L species is characterized by L numbers fi arranged on a line. The number fi
represents the effective barrier for a successful mutation
of ith species. At every time step the smallest number in
the system is located, and this species is selected for mutation. As a result of this mutation this number, as well
as two of its nearest neighbors (representing the species
that strongly interact with a mutated one), are replaced
with new uncorrelated random numbers drawn from the
uniform distribution between 0 and 1. The generalization
of these rules to higher spatial dimensions is straightforward. The BS model may describe the evolution on the
longest time scale, where, due to universality, the exact
microscopic details are of no importance.
In fact, there exists a whole class of models where the
rules consist of selecting the site with the extremal (global
maximal or minimal) value of some variable and then
changing this variable and its nearest neighbors according to some stochastic rule. These models, referred to
as extremal models, were extensively studied (for a recent review, see [3]). They were employed to describe
a variety of physical phenomena such as fluid invasion
in disordered porous media [4], low temperature creep
[5], earthquake dynamics [6], etc. Among these models, the BS model occupies a special place similar to that
of the Ising model in the equilibrium statistical mechanics, since many observations can be rigorously proven
for the BS model and then applied to other extremal
models based on numerical simulations and less rigorous
arguments.

The feature of interest in the BS model (as well as
in other extremal models) is its ability to organize itself
into a scale-free stationary state. The dynamics in this
critical state is given in terms of bursts of activity or
avalanches, which form a hierarchical structure [1,3] of
subavalanches within bigger avalanches. In the biological
context these avalanches represent big extinction events.
In this work we introduce a “master” equation for the
avalanche hierarchy. It describes the cascade process in
which smaller avalanches merge together to form bigger
ones as the critical parameter is changed. From this
equation we derive an infinite series of exact equations,
relating different moments of temporal duration S and
spatial area R d of individual avalanches.
The master equation connects undercritical and overcritical regions of parameters. Given the existence of the
scaling, we rigorously prove that the exponents of the BS
model are the same above and below the transition. From
our results it follows that all terms of the Taylor series of
the scaling function fsxd for the avalanche distribution are
uniquely and explicitly determined by two critical exponents of the model. We expect that the usual restrictions
on the shape of fsxd indirectly relate these two exponents
and, therefore, reduce the number of independent critical
exponents in the BS model to just one.
As was described in [3], the avalanches in extremal
models are defined from the value of the global minimal
number fmin ssd as a function of time s. Then for any given
value of the auxiliary parameter f0 , an f0 avalanche of size
(temporal duration) S is defined as a sequence of S 2 1
successive events with fmin ssd , f0 confined between two
events with fmin ssd $ f0 , in other words, the time steps
when fmin ssd $ f0 divide the time axis into a series of
avalanches, following one another. It is easy to see that
an avalanche defined by this rule is nothing but a stochastic
process in which numbers fi , f0 play the role of active
particles that are randomly created or annihilated. The
avalanche is terminated (and the next one is immediately
started) when there are no particles left in the system.
As in any other creation-annihilation processes (such as
directed percolation, for example) in the BS model there
exists a critical value fc of the creation probability f0 ,
for which the creation of particles is marginally balanced
by their annihilation, and avalanches of all sizes can be
realized. In the stationary state of the BS model on the
infinite lattice, fmin ssd # fc for every s. Therefore, the
overcritical s f0 . fc d region of the branching process
parameters is not accessible, since there are no events
starting or terminating such avalanches. However, if the
system is artificially prepared in the overcritical state with
fi $ f0 . fc everywhere, one can observe overcritical
avalanches. Another way to look into the overcritical
properties of the model is to use the BS branching process
[7] in the simulations of the model. In this process one
only keeps track of the numbers fi , f0 and at each time
step activates the smallest one of them. It was shown in
[7] that the undercritical avalanches in the BS model are
exactly equivalent to the realizations of the BS branching
process. However, in the latter case, one can select f0 .
fc as well. Then there exists a nonzero probability P` s f0 d
that the process will never stop (an infinite avalanche), but
at the same time the size of finite avalanches acquires a
finite cutoff.
We characterize an avalanche by two principal numbers: (1) S —the avalanche size, equal to its temporal
duration; (2) ncov — the number of sites covered ( fi was
updated at least once) by the avalanche.
In one-dimensional models the connected nature of the
set of covered sites ensures its compactness (absence
of holes) and, therefore, ncov is precisely equal to the
avalanche spatial extent R. In higher dimensions (but
below the upper critical dimension) it was conjectured
in [3] that the set of covered sites is a nonfractal object
of the same dimensionality d as the underlying lattice.
This conjecture is based on the numerical observation that
the mass dimension of the avalanche D, which relates the
avalanche size S to its spatial extent R through
S , RD ,

is usually greater than the dimension of the “substrate”
space d. Therefore, the set of covered sites, being
the projection of all points in the avalanche along the
temporal axis onto the substrate space, is likely to be a
dense object, and the spatial size R of the avalanche can
be defined by the relation ncov ­ R d .
The quantity of primary interest in the BS model is
the probability distribution PsS, f0 d of the avalanche sizes
S at any given value of the auxiliary parameter f0 .
The moments in time, when f0 # fmin ssd , f0 1 df0 ,
serve as breaking points for f0 avalanches but not for
f0 1 df0 avalanches. Therefore, when f0 is raised by
an infinitesimal amount df0 some of f0 avalanches merge
together to form bigger s f0 1 df0 d avalanches. In the
rest of this paper we study in more detail the properties of
this merging process and the avalanche hierarchy that it
induces.

The most important observation about f0 avalanches in
the BS model (as well as in several other extremal models,
such as the Sneppen model [8] or invasion percolation
[4]) made by Paczuski, Maslov, and Bak in [3,7] is that
when an f0 avalanche is terminated, the numbers fi on
the set of ncov ­ R d updated sites are uncorrelated and
uniformly distributed between f0 and 1.
It was shown in [3,7] that the direct consequence of this
observation is that the probability of an f0 avalanche of
spatial size R d to merge with the subsequent one when the
parameter f0 is raised by df0 is given by R d df0 ys1 2 f0 d.
(The merging occurs if at least one of the changed numbers
falls in f f0 , f0 1 df0 g.) For the following arguments to be
true it is important that any two subsequent avalanches are
mutually uncorrelated. That is, the probability distribution
of f0 avalanches, starting immediately after the termination
of an f0 avalanche of a given size S, is independent of S.
That is true for the BS model since the dynamics within an
f0 avalanche in the BS model is completely independent
of the particular value of the numbers fi . f0 in the
background that were left by the previous avalanches.
This mutual independence may not be the case for other
extremal models such as the Sneppen model or invasion
percolation.
Now we are in a position to write the exact master
equation describing how the avalanche merging changes
PsS, f0 d as f0 is raised. Let R d sS, f0 d be the average
number of updated (covered) sites in an f0 avalanche of
temporal size S. From our simulations of the BS model
[3] we know that, for f0 close to fc , R d sS, f0 d scales
with S as S dyD [see Eq. (1)]. However, for the following
arguments any form of R d sS, f0 d will suffice. The master
equation for PsS, f0 d can be written as

Here the first term describes the loss of avalanches of
size S due to the merging with the subsequent one, while
the second term describes the gain in PsS, f0 d due to
the merging of avalanches of size S1 with avalanches of
size S 2 S1 . Unlike in a conventional master equation,
the parameter f0 in our master equation is not time.
It is convenient to change variables from f0 to g ­
2 lns1 2 f0 d, so that f0 ­ 0 corresponds to g ­ 0, f0 ­
1 corresponds to g ­ 1`, and dg ­ df0 ys1 2 f0 d. This
change is due to the fact that, although traditionally new
random numbers are drawn from the flat distribution
P s f0 d ­ 1, the “natural” distribution for the BS model
has the probability density P sgd ­ e2g . As usual, the
critical properties of the model are independent of the
particular shape of P . In the rest of the paper we will
use the natural variable g instead of f0 .

This exact equation is the central result of this paper. It has
many interesting physical consequences. When g , gc all
avalanchesP
are finite sP` ­ 0d and normalization requires
ps0, gd ­ `S­1 PsS, gd ­ 1. From the general properties
of the Laplace transform one can write the Taylor series for
psa, gd and rsa, gd at a ­ 0 as psa, gd ­ 1 2 kSlg a 1
kS 2 lg a 2 y2 2 kS 3 lg a 3 y6 1 · · · and rsa, gd ­ kR d lg 2
kR d Slg a 1 kR d S 2 lg a 2 y2 2 1 · · · . Substitution of these
expressions into Eq. (3) results in ≠y≠g lnskSlg a 2
kS 2 lg a 2 y2 1 · · ·d ­ kR d lg 2 kR d Slg a 1 kR d S 2 lg a 2 y2 1
· · ·. Since Eq. (3) holds for arbitrary a, comparing the
coefficients of different powers of a in the above Taylor
series results in an infinite series of exact equations.
Comparison of the coefficients of a 0 gives

This is exactly the “gamma” equation derived in [9].
Higher powers of a in Eq. (3) give new exact equations. Here we show just√the first

The Taylor expansion changes slightly in the overcritical region, where there is a finite probability P` sgd
to start an infinite avalanche. Since the avalanche distribution PsS, gd is limited to finite avalanches, it is
naturally normalized to 1 2 P` s gd. Therefore, when
g . gc the Fourier series for psa, gd can be written as psa, gd ­ 1 2 P` s gd 2 kSlg a 1 kS 2 lg a 2 y2 1
· · · . Now the comparison of the coefficients at a 0 in
Eq. (3) gives

This new equation is the g . gc analog of the gamma
equation (4). We will refer to it as “beta” equation [the
exponent b is traditionally used for the scaling of P` s gd,
while 2g is used for kSlg ].
There is a more straightforward way to derive Eq. (7)
from the average properties of the merging process.
The merging of finite and infinite avalanches gives an
infinite avalanche and, therefore, leads to an increase
in P` s gd. The average probability of finite avalanche
merging with the next one as g is increased by dg is
kR d lg dg, and the probability that this next avalanche
happens to be an infinite one is P` s gd. Therefore,
dP` s gd ­ P` s gd kR d lg dg, which is just Eq. (7).
As in the undercritical case, the Taylor expansion of
Eq. (3) for g . gc determines an infinite series of exact
1184

equations. The first two of them are

As in other creation-annihilation branching processes,
the avalanche distribution PsS, gd in the BS model for
g , gc is known to have a scaling form

where t and s are some critical exponents and fsxd is
a scaling function that rapidly decays to zero as x !
2`. From (10) it follows that the average avalanche size
diverges when g approaches gc from below as kSlg ,
s gc 2 gd2g , where g ­ s2 2 tdys. Substitution of this
expression into the gamma equation (4) results in
for g , gc .

The exponent relation derived from (11) connects s to
D and t: s ­ 1 1 dyD 2 t [3]. It is easy to see that
Eqs. (5)–(9) do not yield additional exponent relations but
further restrict the exact form of the avalanche distribution
scaling function fsxd.
The scaling should work in the overcritical regime
as well. However, unlike in the equilibrium statistical
mechanics, the critical exponent s can a priori be
different above and below the transition. In what follows
we show that, at least for the BS model, this is not true.
Substitution of the scaling form P` s gd , s g 2 gc db into
the beta equation (7) results in

From (12) it follows that the same exponent relation
s ­ 1 1 dyD 2 t holds in the overcritical region, and,
therefore. the exponent s is the same above and below
the transition. The scaling form (10) can now be extended
to include the overcritical region S s sg 2 gc d . 0. As in
various percolation problems [10] the scaling form (10)
for PsS, gd at g . gc results in the exponent relation
b ­ st 2 1dys. An interesting consequence of exact
Eqs. (11) and (12) is that the universal amplitude ratio
for kR d lg is given by the ratio of two critical exponents
This unusual relation between the universal amplitude
ratio and critical exponents is, to our knowledge, unique
for the BS model.
There is a case when the master equation (3) can be
written in a closed form. This is the extensively studied
[11,12] mean field random neighbor version of the BS
model, where, at each time step K 2 1, “neighbors” of
the active site are selected in an annealed random fashion
the thermodynamic limit of this model the number of
updated sites in the avalanche of temporal duration S
is given by ncov ­ sK 2 1dS 1 1. This is the quantity
that should be used instead of R d sS, gd in our equations.
The missing equation connecting rsa, gd and psa, gd
is rsa, gd ­ 2sK 2 1d≠psa, gdy≠a 1 psa, gd, and the
final form of Eq. (3) for the mean field BS model is

derived in [12] using different methods, after the substitution of x ­ e2a and f0 ­ 1 2 e2g satisfies (14) and
has the correct initial condition. That confirms the overall consistency of our approach.
It can be shown [13] that for any given t and s, the
Eq. (3) recursively defines all terms in the Taylor series of
the scaling function fsxd at x ­ 0:

where Gsxd is the Euler’s gamma function. We suspect
that for any given dyD there exist unique t and s ­
1 1 dyD 2 t such that the scaling function satisfies
all usual Rrequirements, such as fsxd ! 0, when x !
6`, and 0 x 2t f fs0d 2 fs2x 1yn dgdx ­ 0 (the absence
of the infinite avalanche below gc ). Which of these
constraints indirectly defines t as a function of dyD
remains to be determined. The numerical solution of
Eq. (2) with R d sS, f0 d ­ AS dyD indeed seems to give the
correct value for t [13]. In Fig. 1 we present the results of
the numerical solution of Eq. (2) with R d sS, f0 d ­ S 0.412 ,
corresponding to the best numerical estimate of dyD
in the one-dimensional BS model [3,14]. The solution
indeed yields t ­ 1.1 6 0.1 which is consistent with
t ­ 1.07 6 .01 determined by extensive Monte Carlo
simulations [3,14].
