Evolutionary Capacitance and Control of Protein Stability in Protein-Protein Interaction Networks

Abstract
In addition to their biological function, protein complexes reduce the exposure of the constituent proteins to the risk of undesired oligomerization by reducing the concentration of the free monomeric state. We interpret this reduced risk as a stabilization of the functional state of the protein. We estimate that protein-protein interactions can account for An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 of additional stabilization; a substantial contribution to intrinsic stability. We hypothesize that proteins in the interaction network act as evolutionary capacitors which allows their binding partners to explore regions of the sequence space which correspond to less stable proteins. In the interaction network of baker's yeast, we find that statistically proteins that receive higher energetic benefits from the interaction network are more likely to misfold. A simplified fitness landscape wherein the fitness of an organism is inversely proportional to the total concentration of unfolded proteins provides an evolutionary justification for the proposed trends. We conclude by outlining clear biophysical experiments to test our predictions.

Author Summary
The folded form of proteins is only marginally stable in vivo and constantly faces the risk of aggregation, unfolding/misfolding, and other aberrant interactions. For most proteins, the folded form is also the functionally relevant one and forces of natural selection strongly modulate its stability. In vivo, proteins interact with each other on a genome-wide scale. Usually, the interaction of a protein and its binding partners requires both the proteins to be in the folded form and as a result, the interactions tend to shift the population of a protein towards the folded form. Consequently, protein-protein interactions interfere with the evolution of protein stability. Here, we present empirical evidence and theoretical justification for proteins' ability to stabilize the folded form of their interaction partners and allow them to explore the region of the sequence space that corresponds to proteins with less stable structure. We argue that the ‘evolutionary capacitance’ – previously thought to be a property of the chaperone HSP90, a special class of proteins – is a property of all proteins, albeit to a different degree.

Introduction
The toxicity due to protein misfolding and aggregation has a considerable effect on the viability of living organisms [1]–. Consequently, cells are under strong selection pressure to evolve thermodynamically stable [6] and aggregation-free protein sequences [7]. The internal region of stable proteins has a tightly packed core of hydrophobic residues. A mutation in the core may disrupt the entire protein structure. Consequently, the core residues are strongly conserved [8], [9]. In contrast, mutations on the surface contribute weakly to the thermodynamic stability of proteins [10] yet surfaces show significant level of conservation [11] owing to protein-protein interactions.

Recent high throughput experiments have established that proteins interact with each other on a genome-wide scale [12]. Such ‘small world’ networks are thought to facilitate biological signaling and ensure that cells remain robust even after a random failure of some of its components [13]. It is thought that evolutionarily, multi-protein complexes are favored over larger size of individual proteins [14] since large proteins are difficult to fold and expensive to synthesize while small interacting proteins can fold independently and then efficiently assemble into large complexes. Individual interaction between proteins can give rise to cooperativity and allostery which results in a finer control over the functional task the protein complex performs. Protein-protein interactions (PPI) are also thought to prevent protein aggregation [15], [16]. Lastly, many proteins can perform promiscuous function in that they can partake in multiple protein complexes. Interestingly, proteins in higher organisms are involved in more interactions and form larger protein complexes compared to more primitive life forms [17].

Here, we hypothesize an additional biophysical advantage for protein-protein interactions. Proteins bound to their interaction partners effectively present a lower monomer concentration inside the cell. Since free monomers are susceptible to misfolding/unfolding and toxic oligomerization, interacting proteins may face a reduced risk towards the same. This reduced risk can be interpreted as interaction-induced stabilization An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 — stabilization due to the protein-protein interaction network — of an otherwise monomeric protein (see Fig. 1 for a cartoon). We propose that by giving proteins an additional stability, each protein in the interaction network acts as an evolutionary capacitor [18], [19] in the evolution of its binding partners: proteins are allowed to explore the less stable regions (regions of low intrinsic stability) of the sequence space as long as they are stabilized by their interaction partners. Inversely, unstable proteins are expected to receive significant additional stability from the interaction network.

Below we outline the empirical evidence for our hypothesis and suggest clear biophysical and evolutionary experiments to test it further.

Results
We present our estimates of the interaction-induced stability An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 (see Methods) and explore the evolutionary interplay between An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 and protein stability An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 using a simplified fitness model for a toy proteome. We test the predictions of the toy model on the proteome of baker's yeast. The fitness model also sheds light on the interplay between protein stability and protein abundance.

Interaction-induced stability An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 is comparable to inherent stability An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.

Fig. 2 shows the histogram of the estimated interaction-induced stability An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 for An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 cytoplasmic yeast proteins for whom abundance, interaction, and localization data is available (see Methods for the details of the calculations). Note that the average PPI induced stability is An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 and can be as high as An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 This stabilization is dependent not only on the number of interaction partners of a given protein or the strengths of those interactions but also on the relative abundances of the interaction partners. In fact, the interaction-induced stability of a protein correlates strongly with the relative concentration of its binding partners

(Spearman An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 This suggests a plausible mechanism of stabilization of a protein without changing its sequence viz. via adjusting the expression levels of its interaction partners (see Discussion below).

The estimated An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 values are of the same order of magnitude as the inherent stabilities of proteins, An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 (An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
) [9]. Given that random mutations are more likely to destabilize proteins [6], we expect protein-protein interactions to act as secondary mechanisms to stabilize proteins and to interfere with the evolution of protein stability.

Simplified fitness model explores the interplay between An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 and An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.

To explore the evolutionary consequences of the interaction-induced stability, we investigate a simplified fitness model of a toy proteome consisting of 15 proteins (see Methods, Text S1, and Table S1). Briefly, the fitness of the cell depends only on the total concentration of unfolded proteins in it [20]. During the course of evolution, each protein acquires random mutations that change either a) its inherent stability An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 or b) the dissociation constant of its interaction with a randomly selected interaction partner. Even though protein abundance and protein-protein interactions evolve at the same time scale as protein stability, the former are dictated largely by the biological function of the involved proteins. Incorporating the fitness effects of changes in expression levels and interaction partners in our simple model is non-trivial. Thus, in order to specifically probe the relation between stability and interactions, we do not allow proteins to change their abundance and interaction partners.

In the model, the concentration of unfolded proteins and thus the fitness of the proteome depends on the total stability An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 of individual proteins. While random mutations are more likely to make proteins unstable, protein-protein interactions increase the total stability. In the canonical ensemble description of the evolution of fitness [21], the inverse effective population size (An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
), the evolutionary temperature quantifies the importance of genetic drift. The effective population size modulates the competition between destabilizing random mutations and stabilizing protein-protein interactions.

We find that at higher effective populations, proteins are inherently stable and only the least stable proteins (small An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
) receive high stabilization from the interaction network (high An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
). At low effective population, due to genetic drift, proteins are inherently destabilized and protein-protein interactions serve as the primary determinant of the effective stability of proteins. Fig. 3 shows the dependence of average inherent stability (An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
), average interaction-induced stability (An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
), and average total stability (An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
) with effective population size. Interestingly, the total stability (An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
) of proteins remains relatively insensitive to changes in population size.

We observe that the correlation coefficient between the inherent stability An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 and the interaction-induced stability An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 itself varies with the effective population size. Even though its magnitude decreases, interaction-induced stability becomes more and more correlated with inherent stability as population size increases (See Fig. 4). In real life organisms, interaction-induced stability acts on a need basis for proteins and serve as a secondary stabilization mechanism. In the drift-dominated regime, which is unlikely to be realized in real life organisms (except probably in parasitic microbes with low population sizes), interaction-induced stability becomes the dominant player in the evolution of total stability of proteins [17]. We next examine if this prediction from the toy model holds for real organisms.

Induced stability correlates with aggregation propensity
Proteome-wide information about the inherent stability of proteins An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 is currently unavailable. Previously, in silico estimates of protein aggregation propensity have been used as proxy for protein stability [22], [23]. We use the TANGO [24] algorithm to estimate protein aggregation propensity. It is known that TANGO aggregation propensity correlates strongly and negatively with protein stability [24]. TANGO has been verified extensively with experiments on peptide aggregation [24] and has been previously used to study the evolutionary aspects of protein-protein interactions [22], [25]. Similar analysis for Aggrescan [26] can be found in Text S1 and Table S3. We find that the aggregation propensity An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 is correlated positively with the interaction-induced stability An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 (Spearman An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
). As expected [2], the aggregation propensity An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 is negatively correlated with protein abundance An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 (Spearman An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
). The correlation between An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 and An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 does not depend on this underlying dependence and persists even after controlling for total abundance An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 (partial Spearman An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
) (See Table S2). This result suggests in the proteome of baker's yeast, protein stability correlates negatively with interaction-induced stability.

Aggregation propensity correlates principally with free monomer abundance
The fitness cost of protein aggregation is directly proportional to the amount of aggregate [20]. Thus, the selection forces that make protein sequences aggregation-free act more strongly on highly expressed proteins [1], [2], [22]. Our hypothesis suggests that the proteins that are bound to their interaction partners present a lower concentration of the free monomeric state in vivo (low An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
) and automatically lower the misfolding/aggregation induced fitness cost, even if highly abundant (high An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
). The selection forces to evolve an aggregation-free sequence may be weaker for such proteins. Consequently, the aggregation propensity An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 should be principally correlated with the free monomer concentration An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 rather than the total abundance An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.


Indeed, we observe that the estimated monomer concentration An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 and the aggregation propensity An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 are correlated negatively (Spearman An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
). Importantly, this correlation is not an artifact of the underlying correlation between the aggregation propensity and total abundance An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 (partial Spearman An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
). At the same time, the partial correlation coefficient between the aggregation propensity An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 and the total protein abundance An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 controlling for the estimated monomer concentration An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 is minimal (partial Spearman An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
). In short, the total free monomer concentration An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 of a protein (rather than An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
, its total abundance) might be a better variable to relate to evolutionary and biophysical constraints on the protein.

Interacting proteins as evolutionary capacitors
We have thus far shown that a protein's interaction partners can significantly stabilize its folded state and this stabilization interferes with the evolution of the inherent stability of the protein. We now explore the reverse viz. the evolutionary consequences of the ability of each protein to impart stability to its interaction partners.

The concept of evolutionary capacitor has been previously introduced for the heat shock protein HSP90 [18], [19], which is also a molecular chaperone and a highly connected hub in the PPI network (70 interaction partners in the current analysis). An elevated concentration of HSP90 buffers the potentially unstable variation in proteins, which may allow proteins to sample a wider region of the sequence space, which may often lead to functional diversification [27]. Similar to HSP90, each protein in the interaction network has some ability to stabilize its interaction partners to a certain extent. Consequently, we study the evolutionary capacitance An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 of individual proteins in the context of the interaction network by estimating the effect of protein knockout on ppi-induced stability in silico. Proteins with higher evolutionary capacitance are defined as those with the higher cumulative destabilizing effect on the proteome. We write,

For each protein An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
, the sum in Eq. 1 is carried out over all proteins An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 that are destabilized due to its knockout. Here, we assume that the potential of a given protein knockout to generate multiple phenotypes depends on the loss of stability of its interaction partners caused by its knockout. We hypothesize that, similar to unstable proteins requiring HSP90 to fold, the interaction partners of proteins with high capacitance should be unstable. In fact, the capacitance An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 of a protein and the mean aggregation propensity  An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 of its interaction partners are strongly correlated (Spearman An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
). The capacitance An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 is significantly correlated with An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 even after controlling for the abundance of the protein (partial spearman An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
) and the number of its interaction partners (partial spearman An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
). This suggests that a protein needs to be present in sufficient quantity and should interact with a large number of proteins in order to effectively act as a capacitor.

We have presented evidence that all proteins can act as an evolutionary capacitor, albeit with variable effectiveness, for their interaction partners. Traditionally, evolutionary capacitors are understood to be chaperones that buffer phenotypic variations by helping misolding-prone proteins fold in a proper structure [19]. Not surprisingly, when we carried out functional term enrichment analysis using gene ontology [28], we found that approximately half of the top 20 capacitors have ‘chaperone’ in their name. The top 20 are also over represented in the chaperone-like molecular function of protein binding and unfolded protein binding (An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
) and the biological process of protein folding (An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
). These findings validate our definition of capacitors that were previously identified as chaperones. Interestingly, some of the predicted capacitors do not currently have a protein folding-related functional annotation. These need more experimental investigation (see supplementary File S1 for the list). This suggests that previously identified evolutionary capacitor HSP90 may in fact only be one among the broader set of evolutionary capacitors. Every protein in the interaction network is an evolutionary capacitor for its interaction partners and evolutionary capacitor is a quantitative distinction rather than a qualitative one.

Discussion
Recently, Fernández and Lynch [17] showed that random genetic drift is the chief driving force behind thermodynamically less stable yet densely interacting proteins in higher organisms [17]. Additionally, protein complexes in higher organisms have more members than in lower organisms [14]. Recently, it was observed that a destabilizing mutation in the enzyme DHFR in E. coli leads to functional tetramerization of the otherwise monomeric enzyme [29] suggesting that protein-protein interactions can at least partially compensate the effect of protein destabilization. An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 lactoglobulin is an aggregation-prone protein generally found as a dimer. It was shown that the specific interactions responsible for the formation of the dimer considerably reduce the risk of protein aggregation [16]. Ataxin-3 is a protein implicated in polyglutamine expansion diseases wherein the functional interactions of the protein reduce the exposure of its aggregation prone interface and thereby decrease its aggregation propensity [15].

Here, we have quantified the interaction-induced stability on a proteome wide scale and hypothesized that the PPI-induced stabilization is a secondary evolutionary advantage of the PPI network; alleviating the selection pressure on proteins in functional multi-protein complexes to evolve a stable folded. A simple model for the fitness of the proteome provided a fundamental justification for the co-evolution of protein stability and protein-protein interactions and made predictions that were tested on the proteome of baker's yeast. In the model, when the effects of natural selection are weak, proteins acquire stability mainly via protein-protein interactions. At a higher population size — in the absence of genetic drift — proteins are intrinsically stable and protein-protein interactions stabilize only those proteins that fail to evolve inherent stability.

We have also presented evidence that all interacting proteins stabilize their binding partners to a certain extent and act as the evolutionary capacitance [19] for their evolution. Interestingly, though some of the top 20 capacitors predicted in this study are known chaperones and are over-represented in GO ontology terms such as protein binding, unfolded protein binding, and protein folding; others do not have any protein folding-related functional annotation and need experimental investigation.

The importance of disordered proteins, especially in the proteomes of higher organisms, cannot be neglected. The proteome of baker's yeast does not have many completely disordered proteins but An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 of the amino acids in the proteins of yeast are predicted to be in a disordered state [30] (An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 for the proteins considered in this study, see supplementary Text S1 and Fig. S4). Even though the development presented above applied only to an equilibrium between folded and unfolded/misfolded/aggregated protein, it can be easily generalized to disordered proteins. This is because even though the folded An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 unfolded equilibrium is not well defined, similar to well structured proteins, disordered proteins also exist either in a soluble monomeric (instead of the folded state), a misfolded/aggregated, and a complexed state. Many disordered proteins acquire a definite structure when bound to their interaction partners and seldom dissociate to the soluble monomeric [31]. These serve as even stronger candidates for the beneficiaries of interaction-induced stability compared to folded proteins. Consequently, we include both partially disordered proteins and structured proteins in the current analysis of the An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 cytoplasmic proteins.

Suggested experimental tests
Modulation of protein stability by overexpression of its partners
We predict that the measured free energy of protein folding in vivo [32], [33] will be lower than the in vitro measurement. Moreover, this free energy can be modulated by overexpressing the interaction partners of the protein that increases the equilibrium constant An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 between the folded monomer and the generic complexed state. Recently, it was observed that the measured stability of phosphoglycerate kinase was higher by An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 in vivo compared to in vitro [33].

Overexpression-instability epistasis
Does the PPI-induced stabilization have evolutionary advantages? We propose the following experimental test. Consider two mutated phenotypes for an isolated interacting pair of proteins A and B in an organism 1) An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
, a destabilized mutant of protein A and 2) An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
 where B is overexpressed. We predict that lowering of the organismal fitness due to destabilization of protein A (An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
) can be at least partially rescued by the overexpression of the protein B (An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
) i.e. the combination of two penalizing mutations may perhaps be advantageous to the organism.
