The authors present a model explaining the following observation: while the use of the UGA stop codon depends on G-content, the UAG frequency is almost constant in genomes with highly diverse G-content. While I see no problems with the observations and the model, I have some editorial comments and questions.

The authors state several times – starting with the very first sentence of the abstract – that the usage of stop codons has not been rigorously studied. This is not correct. In the 90’s, several papers considered the usage of stop codons and its dependence on the local context, including tandem stops and tetranucleotides involving stop-codons. I think these papers should be mentioned.
How the 11 studied genome pairs were selected?
Is the G/A content the same in the 3rd codon position in all codon pairs? If not, why this is a good parameter?
And in any case, what are the reasons to suspect that the selection regime in the amino-acid-encoding codons is the same as in the stops (the former may depend on concentrations of tRNAs and the codon-anticodon interactions; the latter, on interactions with the release factors). What about the A/G choice in the four-fold codon families?
The reasoning in page 6 is not clearly presented, and misprints add to the confusion. How is formula S2 = ln ((fG(1-fTAG))/fTAG) used? Do I understand it correctly that the next formula S2 = ln (3.6fG + 0.4) results from a fit to observations (comparison of genome pairs)? – I think, this should be explained more explicitly.
By the way, the two formulas for S2, theoretical and observed ones, yield a dependence between fG and fTAG – does it hold?
Finally, reference to equation (5) in the preceding paragraph should be about equation (4), and the sentence “S2 has a clear G-content dependence is well approximated…” probably should be “S2 has a clear G-content dependence that is well approximated…” .
Polarization of substitutions using parsimony may be dangerous if there is selection towards a specific, preferred nucleotide: in some cases two parallel nonpreferred-to-preferred substitutions may occur, and they will be interpreted as a single preferred-to-nonpreferred substitution, hence skewing the substitution statistics.