1) It is common knowledge that in many cases it is much more difficult to prove a negative result than a positive one. Thus, the authors have set themselves a hard problem: to show that the frequencies of gene pairs overlapping in different frames can be explained by simple consideration of amino acid frequencies and codon usage and do not require more complicated evolutionary explanation.
2) While the point is well taken and the approach clearly interesting, there still seem to be some technical issues that have not been addressed. Of course, the main problem plaguing all large-scale genome analysis projects is reliance on existing annotations: one may find himself studying idiosyncrasies of annotation software rather than biologically relevant features. For some analyses the authors exclude genes annotated as hypothetical, but this does not guarantee that gene starts have been predicted correctly.
3) At that, it is noteworthy that all non-trivial observations have been made for 5'-extensions, but not 3'-extension: it is fairly easy to mispredict the start codon (some annotation projects routinely consider the most distal codon to serve as the start), but not the stop codon.

I do not see an easy way out of this difficulty. One possible control is to consider separately overlaps caused by 5'-most start codons for the downstream gene (open reading frame) and internal start codons.
4) Another approach is much more time-consuming, but it might provide interesting biological insight per se. The authors state that overlaps are caused by mutations in either start or stop codons. For the stop codons this should be not very difficult to trace to these mutations to specific branches of the evolutionary tree. Then the entire analysis might be repeated for the overlaps where the causing mutation is known. It is likely that it would seriously decrease the sample size, but it would also make the sample much more reliable. In particular, one might consider separately established overlaps persisting for some time and very recent overlaps caused by species-specific mutations (or, for that matter, sequencing errors).

With start codons it might be more difficult. Indeed, one has to consider separately two types of mutations. One is the loss of a pre-existing start codon, and this can be treated in a manner similar to the one when stops are considered. A useful addition would be considering separately cases where there are candidate start codons upstream (in the previous reading frame, either on the same strand, or the complementary strand) and when candidate start codons can be found within the gene whose original start codon is mutated. The second type of mutations is gain of function, that is, emergence of a new functional upstream start codon. However, in this case it would be very difficult to prove by purely computational means that the new start really functions.

There are also other possibilities for a more detailed analysis. A common problem for all of them is that they require considerable effort to prove a rather simple point, and thus it is not clear whether they are worth pursuing.

5) Another important problem is, however, necessary to be addressed, as it clearly lies in the framework of the suggested approach. The point is, for a new upstream codon to be functional, it needs to occur in the same open reading frame as the old one, that is, there should be no stop codons in the region between the new and old starts. Since the frequency of candidate stop codons is not the same in the two shifted reading phases of the upstream gene, this might influence the general conclusions made in the paper. It looks like the authors have something like that in mind when they write about "stronger purifying selection" in long extensions, but this point is never quantified, and the applied term looks somewhat misleading and inviting further criticisms: if there is stronger purifying selection, one should observe decrease in the substitution rate in the longer-overlap regions compared to shorter-overlap ones – is this the case?
6) Background, second paragraph: "Overlaps in the same frame are rare": that depends on how one quantifies it; gene fusions do not seem to be very rare in bacterial genomes, especially conserved with long overlaps.
7) Results, first paragraph: It might be interesting to learn more about 18 non-standard start codons yielding short phase-1 overlaps. Are they functional? Are they conserved? Are they regulatory?
8) Discussion, fifth paragraph: One of the reasons for relative scarcity of 3'-extensions might be that many bacterial genes contain tandem stop codons. This has been ascribed to avoidance of translational readthrough, but an evolutionary consequence is that mutation in one stop codon from a tandem pair does not create overlapping genes.
9) Discussion, sixth paragraph: Correlation between the GC-content and the frequency of stop codons in frames 1 and 2 does not prove the absence of selection for such stop codons: one needs to demonstrate that the number of observed stops coincides with the number of expected ones, while controlling for dependencies between adjacent codons.