This paper extends the authors' previous work identifying analogous enzymes more than a decade ago. The authors expanded their search methods by utilizing both the Swiss Prot database and the KEGG database to better associate proteins with enzymatic activity. By the author's own admission, no strong trends were observed in the dataset, but they were able to identify a few very interesting patterns, including enrichment of analogous enzymes among glycoside hydrolases, enzymes involved in oxidative stress relief, and among the TIM Barrel and NAP(P)-binding Rossmann structural folds. As expected, the authors find that the number analogous enzymes scales with increasing genome size. The authors discuss the evolutionary origins of some of the trends noted above, as well as the limitations imposed on their identification schemes by the EC numbering system itself. Overall, I do like this paper a lot, especially because in my lab we have recently become interested in one particular family of analogous enzymes. So, I enjoyed looking at a bigger picture, while picturing our own work in its context.

The analysis scheme employed is straightforward and utilizes proven bioinformatic methodology. The authors appear to utilize conservative criteria for inclusion of data for the analysis, so the results are likely to under-predict rather than over-predict analogous enzymes. The results greatly expand the listing of analogous enzymes and the extensive supplementary material provides useful information for specialist interested in any particular family of enzymes.

The inclusion of numerous genomes through the use of the KEGG database allowed analysis of analogous enzymes to be conducted on a sufficient scale to give a fairly good approximation of the their relative abundance and the importance of analogous inventions during evolution. The coverage of structural information, sequence, and biological information seems to be such that the boundaries for the proportion of analogous enzymes (~10% of the EC nodes) seem unlikely to significantly change with future genome sequencing.

Lack of true novelty in this analysis is a minor quibble, as it generated a useful resource in and of itself and the specific cases highlighted are of interest in a number of fields. The use of EC number annotations may be suspect in some cases where the traditional sequence similarity based annotation methods are unreliable or where the EC definitions are inadequate. I can offer a couple of examples, where we happened to dig around a little bit. For instance, Table S1 lists a couple of cellulases (entries #78 and #91) in glycoside hydrolase families 10 and 11. It appears that there are no experimentally defined cellulases in these families, and enzymes shown are putative xylanases. It also might be just a matter of semantics, since these enzyme are likely to be hemicellulases (technically could be called cellulases, I guess). Anyway, the authors are fully aware of the limitations imposed and there is no way to verify available experimental evidence for each and every entry in such a large-scale effort. The vast majority of the enzymes included in the study are readily identified by sequence similarity based annotations, so the conclusions as a whole are sound.
