In this study, the authors report a novel domain superfamily within the β-grasp fold. The predicted distinct property of this domain is binding diverse soluble ligands, thus it is termed Soluble-Ligand-Binding β-grasp or SLBB. Motivation for this work came from expectation (but lack of factual knowledge) that some members of the ubiquitous β-grasp fold are involved in binding small ligands.

First, the authors searched the PDB database with known structures to retrieve related structures and then used an array of sensitive sequence-based searches (hidden-Markov-model- or position-specific-scoring-matrix-based) to identify remote homologs. Technically, it is very well done and described in sufficient detail. The authors took advantage of available structures to guide editing of the multiple alignment, which in turn allowed them to associate conserved positions with the structural features.

Biological function prediction came primarily from the contextual analysis, which was quite thorough. The most interesting prediction is that the primary role of one of the two SLBB clades is binding vitamin B12 and its precursors.

Overall, this is an interesting, well-executed study and defining novel domain families and assigning potential biological functions is very important. I would like to add that it is also important to deposit the newly described domain to leading domain databases, such as Pfam. I have not seen plans for doing so in this study. This reviewer is guilty of not always doing so either, but still it should be a rule rather than exception. Perhaps, two version of SLBB could be produced capturing characteristics of the two clades.

Major concern
Essentially, there is only one major concern with respect to generalization of biological function prediction. I think the members of the domain clade are divergent enough to worry about B12 and its precursors being the only or even the main ligand. The statement in the abstract seems to address this issue – the authors rightly indicate that "members of this superfamily are likely to bind a range of soluble ligands, including B12"; however in the text it becomes more stringent. For instance, on page 3, when describing SLBB fusions with HTH domains in transcription factors, it is suggested that these proteins "respond to B12 or its precursors". I would suggest toning down the claim that all members of the transcobalamin clade bind exclusively B12 and its precursors. Perhaps, the authors did not intend to make it sounds like that, but it does.